May 2023

Structural Racism and Health Equity Language Guide
The American Heart Association strives to use thoughtful, sensitive and consistent language to
help audiences understand important information about health and science. This guide is a
reference to help understand and appropriately use language related to health equity, primarily
as it pertains to race, ethnicity, structural racism and social determinants of health. You can also
find shorter definitions in the glossary, and common usage for names of groups and populations
in the quick reference. For further guidance about equity-related language outside this focus,
please see the AHA Editorial Style Guide. We developed this guide from leading language guides;
civic, community and health organizations; government entities; academic references; research;
historical references; expert insights; and media reports. (References are linked, footnoted and/or
listed at the end of this document.) Because language evolves, this guide will be continually
updated. If you have questions, contact our Office of Health Equity.

Race and Ethnicity
Definitions: Race is a social construct not rooted in biology. Official racial designations have
changed over time. The U.S. Census Bureau defines race as a person’s self-identification with
one or more social groups, including white, Black or African American, Asian, American Indian
and Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander or another race.
Ethnicity also is a social construct not rooted in biology, referring to the social characteristics
people may have in common such as language, religion, regional background, national
background, traditions and culture. Examples include Hispanic, Haitian, Korean and
Cherokee.
Usage: When discussing race and ethnicity, it’s always best to be specific. Lumping (or
aggregating) different groups of people together can be vague, offensive or dismissive.
However, grouping people broadly is sometimes useful when describing health disparities.
AHA communication about broad groups of people should:
•

Shine a light on inequities.

•

Not shame, blame, label or offend.

•

Be accurate, specific and in context, to the fullest extent possible.

Updated May 2023

1

•

Be understandable by the intended audience.

•

Be in step with common usage.

•

Use consistent language.

•

Frame inequities with historical context as often as possible. (Space may be a
limiting factor in some cases.)

Issues involving race and ethnicity call for thoughtful consideration, precise language and
open discussions with people of diverse backgrounds about how to be sensitive, respectful,
appropriate and accurate. Some basics:
•

Avoid generalizations and labels; race and ethnicity are one part of a person’s
identity.

•

Strive to accurately represent the world or a community and its diversity.
Omissions can render people invisible and cause anguish.

•

Consider carefully whether to identify people by race. Include racial or ethnic
information only when clearly relevant. Drawing unnecessary attention to race or
ethnicity can be interpreted as bigotry.

The terms below for referencing races and ethnicities are based largely on guidelines in The
Associated Press Stylebook 1, the most common guidance for consumer and web content.
Whenever communicating about race and ethnicity, defer to the sources, authors or
audiences for their preferred terms. Often you can find their preferences on their official
biographies or social media accounts. If you don’t know, ask.
African American: Acceptable for an American Black person of African descent. Black also is
acceptable, but only as an adjective. (Example: Black people, not Blacks.) African American
and Black aren’t necessarily interchangeable. Follow an individual’s preference, if known. This
is extremely important because the legacy of discrimination affects some Black people’s
feelings of connectedness to America. If preference is not known, use Black. Specificity is best
when known. For example, Americans of Caribbean heritage often prefer Caribbean American.
American Indian or Alaska Native, Native American, Indigenous American: These are
acceptable in general when referring to two or more people of different tribal affiliations. Use
the term preferred by the source, author or audience, as appropriate. Some sources prefer
Native People. The U.S. Census Bureau defines American Indian or Alaska Native as a person
having origins in any of the original peoples of North America (which includes Mexico and the
Caribbean islands) and South America (including Central America) who maintain tribal
affiliations. For individuals, use the name of the tribe. If the name isn’t known, try to determine
it. He is a Navajo commissioner. She is a member of the Nisqually Indian Tribe.
1

The Associated Press Stylebook. www.apstylebook.com. Published 2020. https://www.apstylebook.com/racerelated-coverage

Updated May 2023

2

Some tribes and tribal nations use member; others use citizen. If in doubt, use citizen. In
Alaska, Indigenous groups are collectively known as Alaska Natives. First Nation is preferred
by some tribes in Canada. Do not use Indian as shorthand for American Indian. Avoid casual
use of words such as wampum, warpath, powwow, teepee, squaw and off the reservation,
which are disparaging and offensive. Also avoid the casual use of tribe, such as describing a
group of friends this way.
Asian American: Acceptable for an American of Asian descent. When possible, follow the
person’s preference or refer to a person’s country of origin. For example: Filipino American or
Japanese American. Given Asia’s size and diversity, regional references also may be
acceptable. Southeast Asian is a common term to describe people from the area
encompassing regions south of China, east of the Indian subcontinent and northwest of
Australia. South Asian refers to people from the region defined in geographical and ethnocultural terms, consisting of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal,
Pakistan and Sri Lanka. East Asian people are from China, Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong,
Mongolia, Macao, South Korea, Tibet and North Korea. Language describing Asian people,
communities and populations continues to evolve. Asian American and Pacific Islanders (AAPI)
can an acceptable term to describe the broad population made up of Asian Americans and
Pacific Islanders.
biracial, multiracial: Acceptable when relevant to describe people with more than one racial
heritage. Usually more useful when describing large, diverse groups than individuals.
Multiracial can encompass any combination of races. Don’t use mixed race, which can be
offensive.
Black: Capitalize when referring to people, communities, populations or culture. Use as an
adjective, not a noun: Say Black people, but not Blacks. Widespread use of capitalized Black
recognizes the common understanding that the term reflects a shared identity and culture.
While African American also is acceptable for Black Americans of African descent, the terms
are not necessarily interchangeable. Use the preference of the source, author or audience
when known. Don’t use dated and offensive terms such as Negro and colored, unless they are
part of a formal name of an organization or a quotation in which the term is appropriate and
essential.
Chicano, Chicana: A term Mexican American people sometimes use to describe their heritage.
Use only if it is a person’s preference. The term denotes pride for some but also historically has
been used to describe Mexican American people of lower social standing in a derogatory way.

Updated May 2023

3

Hispanic: A person from — or whose ancestors were from — a Spanish-speaking land or
culture. Use a more specific identification when possible, such as Cuban, Puerto Rican,
Dominican or Mexican American. It is acceptable to use Hispanic interchangeably with Latino
and Latina when generally referencing Hispanic and Latino people as a larger group, as there
is no universal convention. Use as an adjective, not as a noun.
Because Hispanic and Latino people can be of any race, comparing health or other issues with
white or Black people may require more detail for clarity.
Examples: Hispanic people had higher blood pressure than white and Black people who are
not Hispanic, researchers found. For general usage: We’re celebrating the accomplishments of
Hispanic people this month.
Indigenous: Capitalize when referring to original inhabitants of a place. Aboriginal people

welcomed a new era of Indigenous relations in Australia. Bolivia’s Indigenous people represent
62% of the population.
(REVISED) A person from — or whose ancestors are from — Latin America. Use
Latino, Latina (REVISED):
a more specific identification when possible, such as Cuban, Puerto Rican, Brazilian or Mexican
American . Latino is the masculine form of the word, and Latina is the feminine form; in
Spanish, most all nouns are one or the other. For groups of females, use the plural Latina
people; for groups of males or of mixed gender, use the plural Latino people. Use as an
adjective rather than a noun. Say Latino people or Latina people , rather than Latinos or
Latinas .
The terms Latinx and Latine are not used or preferred on a large scale, so should be avoided in
general. Both terms are acceptable, however, if they are used in quotations, are someone’s
stated preference, or are the official names of organizations. Additionally, the number who
prefer and use the term Latinx is growing, especially among younger generations and the
LGBTQ+ community. So carefully consider your audience when considering Latinx. This story
offers more interesting background on these terms.
Using the inclusive constructions Hispanic and Latino or Hispanic/Latino also is acceptable
because Hispanic and Latino people can be of any race. Use Hispanic and Latino people,
Hispanic/Latino patients , etc.
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islanders (REVISED): People having origins in Hawaii,
Guam, Samoa or other Pacific Islands. This population also includes people who reported
entries in the census such as Pacific Islander; Polynesian entries, such as Tahitian, Tongan and
Tokelauan; Micronesian entries, such as Marshallese, Palauan and Chuukese; and Melanesian
entries, such as Fijian, Guinean and Solomon Islander. Asian American and Pacific Islanders
(AAPI) is a common and acceptable term to describe the broad population made up of Asian
American people and Pacific Islanders. Specificity is always preferred when known and if
requested.

Updated May 2023

4

For copy written for local Hawaiians, Hawaii should be spelled as Hawai’i (a reversed
apostrophe is acceptable for the okina symbol), as this is the proper way to recognize the
state and honor the culture. However, the spelling of Hawaii (without the okina symbol) is
acceptable elsewhere. The term Hawaiian does not use the okina because it is not part of the
native Hawai’i language.
non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic white: These cumbersome terms have been commonly used
in research and data comparing health or outcomes, because Hispanic and Latino people can
be of any race, which is why these terms often are appropriate for science and medical
professionals. However, for consumers, strive to be specific instead of using these terms.
Example: The study found Hispanic people of all races fared better than white and Black
people who aren’t Hispanic. If necessary, for your audience, briefly explain that Latino and
Hispanic people can be of any race. If non-Hispanic can’t be avoided, use as adjectives but
not nouns. Say non-Hispanic Black people or non-Hispanic white people, not non-Hispanic
Blacks or non-Hispanic whites.
White, white: Uppercase White to describe people and populations in medical/scientific copy,
but lowercase white in consumer copy. While this is inconsistent organizationally, it keeps the
AHA consistent with industry standards for each audience. American Medical Association
style, followed by our journals and other medical writing, uppercases White. The AP
Stylebook, which the AHA and other consumer content follows, lowercases white. There is not
universal agreement about whether to capitalize White; there is valid support for both
lowercasing and uppercasing. Use as an adjective but not a noun. White people or white
people, not Whites or whites. Don’t use Caucasian, which originates from pseudoscience race
classifications described in this article.

racial equity, racial inequity
Definition: Racial equity is achieved when racial identity no longer predicts how a person fares
in many aspects of life. This includes elimination of policies, practices, attitudes and cultural
messages that reinforce different outcomes predicted by race. Racial inequity is when racial
groups face barriers such as structural racism that result in disparities in care and the ability to
be healthy. Because of these barriers, for example, in the U.S., Black, Hispanic, Indigenous and
some Asian people are more likely to live in poverty, be imprisoned, not complete high school,
be unemployed and experience health problems such as obesity, heart disease and diabetes.

racial trauma
Definition: Trauma related to racial discrimination or the perception of racial discrimination 2.
This includes threats of harm and injury, humiliating and shaming events and witnessing harm
to others. Racial trauma can result in post-traumatic stress disorder and health problems
detailed in this article.

2

Comas-Díaz L, Hall GN, Neville HA. Racial trauma: theory, research, and healing: Introduction to the special issue. Am
Psychol. 2019; 74:1–5.

Updated May 2023

5

racism, racist
Definition: Prejudice or discrimination against individuals or groups based on beliefs of racial
superiority or the belief that race reflects inherent differences in attributes and capabilities.
Racism is the basis for social stratification and differential treatment that provides advantage
to the dominant group 3. Racism appears in different forms (defined later in this document).
Usage: The AHA should not shy away from these words as appropriate, but we must carefully
consider facts and context. Our communications should start with fact-based, sensitive
language rooted in this important point: Racism persists throughout society and is
detrimental to people’s health and well-being. When discussing structural racism, strive to
include references to historic policies, practices and systems, and how they continue to harm
health and well-being.
Some use the term racist to refer to anyone who benefits from structural racism and doesn’t
actively work to dismantle it. Avoid this use unless essential in a direct quotation; if used, explain it.
Avoid racially charged, racially motivated or racially tinged, euphemisms that convey little
meaning. Use racist when truly applicable. Example: Mississippi has a history of racist
lynchings, not a history of racially motivated lynchings.
Deciding whether a statement, action, policy, etc., should be described as racism or racist
often is not clear-cut. Such decisions should include discussion with colleagues and/or others
from diverse backgrounds and perspectives. In general, avoid using racist or any other label
for a person. Don’t repeat derogatory terms except when it is crucial to the understanding of
an event.
Below are general categories of racism. Not all ideologies, concepts, language and actions fit
perfectly into these categories.
•

cultural racism A set of societal beliefs and customs that deliberately build and
maintain a system valuing one race over others. In the U.S., one example is when
white people and whiteness are valued over other racial and ethnic groups.

•

individual racism Actions, beliefs and attitudes of individuals, overtly or covertly,
toward a person intentionally expressing prejudice, hate or bias 4 based on race.

•

internalized racism Acceptance — by people who have suffered the effects of
racism — of negative societal beliefs and stereotypes about themselves.

•

interpersonal racism This occurs in public expressions of racism among
individuals, often involving slurs, biases or hateful words or actions4.

•

institutional racism This occurs through policies and practices at institutions or

3

Friske, Gilbert, Gardner. Position Statement- Prejudice, Discrimination, and Racism. NASP- National Association of School
Psychologists. Published 2019. https://www.nasponline.org/x26830.xml.

4
Talking About Race: Being Antiracist. National Museum of African American History and Culture. Published October 1,
2019. https://nmaahc.si.edu/learn/talking-about-race/topics/being-antiracist

Updated May 2023

6

organizations that, intentionally or not, put a racial group at a disadvantage.
These discriminatory treatments or biased policies don’t necessarily mention any
racial group explicitly4.
•

symbolic racism A prejudiced and coherent belief system about other people.
Historically applied by white people against Black people in the U.S., although it
is likely held in some measure among other ethnic groups.

•

structural racism, systemic racism Often used interchangeably, the AHA prefers
the term structural racism. It is a system in which public policies, institutional
practices, cultural representations and other norms perpetuate racial inequity 5.
The policies, practices and other aspects of structural racism work in various, often
reinforcing ways.
Structural racism is a principal driver of health disparities, according to the AHA’s
presidential advisory on the issue. The definition of structural racism in the
advisory also is acceptable for medical and scientific audiences:

The normalization and legitimization of an array of dynamics (historical, cultural,
institutional and interpersonal) that routinely advantage white people while
producing cumulative and chronic adverse outcomes for people of color.
In the U.S., structural racism gives privileges to white people resulting in
disadvantages to Black, Hispanic, Indigenous and Asian people. This occurs
systemically through, among other things, the justice system, the education
system, housing, employment and lack of access to care. Such systems have been
constructed and reinforced throughout history, guided by a mindset of white
supremacy or white superiority.

5

Institute Staff. 11 Terms You Should Know to Better Understand Structural Racism. The Aspen Institute. Published
August 29, 2017.https://www.aspeninstitute.org/blog-posts/structural-racism-definition/

Updated May 2023

7

Other important terms:
adverse childhood experiences
Definition: Potentially traumatic childhood events — such as violence, abuse, neglect and
food insecurity — that can undermine a child’s sense of safety, stability and bonding. Adverse
childhood experiences are linked to chronic health problems, mental illness and substance
misuse in adulthood. Women and historically excluded racial and ethnic groups are at greater
risk of experiencing four or more types of these experiences, according to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.

affirmative action
Definition: Laws designed to address discrimination based on race, gender and national origin
in employment, education, government contracts and more. Affirmative action began in the
U.S. under the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Rulings expanded to include discrimination based on
disability and age. The Civil Rights Act paved the way for the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which
prohibited literacy tests and other discriminatory voting practices, as well as the Fair Housing
Act of 1968, which banned discrimination in the sale, rental and financing of property.
Affirmative action is codified into law by the US Department of Labor. Black people in America
are the primary beneficiaries of affirmative action. (White women have benefitted most from
affirmative action.)
Usage: Be careful because this term often is misused and misunderstood. It has been used in
efforts to discredit academic and professional merit of Black and Latino people.

ally, allyship
Definitions: An ally is a person who is not a member of a disenfranchised or mistreated group
but supports that group. Allyship is the proactive practice of working in solidarity and
partnership with people enduring structural racism or other systemic discrimination that
deprives people of basic rights, equal access and the ability to thrive in society6. Allyship can
be a difficult practice. It requires trusting relationships, consistency and accountability.
Allyship can involve unlearning and re-evaluating systems, practices, policies, norms,
traditions, thought processes and language that support structural racism and discrimination.
Allyship takes courage. The goal for allies is to better understand structural racism and how it
can be dismantled 7.
Usage: Briefly define this term, if necessary, for the audience.
Examples: Actions of allyship include advocating for others, sharing growth opportunities,
listening, supporting, self-reflecting and changing. This article breaks down how to practice allyship.

American Heart Association’s 10 Commitments
Definition: The American Heart Association established 10 Commitments to removing barriers
6

Rochester Racial Justice Toolkit. Beyond Allyship. Rochester Racial Justice Toolkit. Published 2016.
https://thetoolkit.wixsite.com/toolkit/beyond-allyship
7

Gaines J. Be an Ally/Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion. www.edi.nih.gov. Published March 4, 2019.
https://www.edi.nih.gov/blog/communities/be-ally

Updated May 2023

8

to health equity. These actions cover all areas of the AHA’s work, including research,
community engagement, advocacy, increasing the diversity of our workforce and more.
Though there are many barriers to health, the Commitments focus on removing these three:
adverse social determinants of health, threats to rural health and structural racism.

anti-Blackness
Definition: Behaviors, attitudes and practices of people and institutions that systemically
dehumanize Black people to maintain white supremacy. Anti-Blackness contributes to
policies, systems and social norms that comprise structural racism. Anti-Blackness can be
perpetrated by people of any race or ethnicity.

anti-racism, anti-racist
Definitions: Anti-racism is actively opposing racism by advocating for political, economic and
social change. Anti-racist tends to be an individualized approach.
Example: The manager’s reassessing of her vendor selection process is anti-racist.
apathetic racism
Definition: Allowing racism to persevere through passive tolerance, benign ignorance or
neglect. Apathetic racism accepts the current structure that creates health disparities based
on race.
Usage: This term is not widely used, so be sure to explain fully if you use it.
asset framing (NEW)
Definition: Asset framing defines people by their aspirations and contributions before
exploring their deficits, as opposed to defining people by their problems or challenges. Asset
framing prioritizes people-first language. Be specific about who and what you mean; avoid
stigmatizing language.
Examples: He has been diagnosed with diabetes, not He is a diabetic. … She is dealing with the
health implications of obesity, not She’s obese.

barriers to health equity
Definition: Numerous barriers prevent equitable health for everyone. The American Heart
Association’s 2024 Impact Goal aims to improve cardiovascular health for all with work that
focuses on removing three barriers to health equity: adverse social determinants of health,
threats to rural health and structural racism.

bias, implicit bias, unconscious bias
Definitions: Bias is the result of beliefs, ideas and thought processes every person develops.
Implicit biases and unconscious biases are negative associations people unknowingly hold
and are expressed without conscious awareness. Bias is generally individualized. Racial and
ethnic biases, intentional or not, are harmful to people of any race. Bias has particularly
harmed the health and well-being of Black, Hispanic, Asian, Indigenous and other people.
Usage: It’s important to consider and question your biases, and whether and how you are
communicating them.

Updated May 2023

9

Example: A hiring manager may unfairly and even unconsciously overlook a job candidate or
an employee for promotion based on the manager’s views toward that person’s race,
ethnicity, education level, geography or even name.

bigotry
Definition: Intolerant opinions and prejudices glorifying one group and denigrating members
of another group, often of different races and ethnicities.

black as negative terms
Definition: Many common words and phrases reference black as something negative. Though
not necessarily referring to race or purposely used to imply race, these terms can continually
reinforce the idea that black stands for something negative.
Usage: Approach these terms with sensitivity. If you think a term possibly might come across
as offensive, there are usually better options.
Examples: Instead of blackball, you could use ban or bar. Instead of black sheep, consider
misfit or a similar term. Instead of black market, consider unauthorized or under the table.

Black, Indigenous and other people of color (BIPOC)
Definition: The term has been used to emphasize historic and systemic oppression of Black
and Indigenous people in the U.S. and Canada 8.
Usage: Avoid as a general term for people of color because Latino people, Asian people and
people who are Pacific Islanders may not see themselves in this phrase, and many people are
not familiar with the term. It can be used when accurate in specific situations, including names
of organizations or in quotes.
Example: The court ruled that the 1978 law did indeed discriminate against Black, Indigenous

and other people of color.

Black Lives Matter, #BlackLives Matter
Definition: Black Lives Matter Global Network Foundation, Inc. is a global organization in the
United States, United Kingdom and Canada, whose mission is to eradicate white supremacy
and build local power to intervene in violence inflicted on Black people by the state and
vigilantes. Alicia Garza, Patrisse Cullors and Opal Tometi founded #BlackLivesMatter in 2013 in
response to the acquittal of the man charged with murder for shooting Trayvon Martin. Black
Lives Matter and BLM often are used as general statements of support for Black people rather
than specifically supporting the Black Lives Matter Global Network Foundation.
Usage: Either Black Lives Matter as a noun or the Black Lives Matter movement is acceptable.
BLM is acceptable on second reference. The American Heart Association supports BLM’s
advocacy to end police brutality and racially motivated violence against Black people but is
not formally involved with the movement. Use of the #BlackLivesMatter hashtag is commonly
used to show support for Black people rather than specifically expressing support for the Black
Lives Matter Global Network Foundation.
Garcia SE. Where Did BIPOC Come From? The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/article/what-is-bipoc.html.
Published June 17, 2020.
8

Updated May 2023

10

Black Lives Matter peaceful protests
Definition: The murder of George Floyd in 2020 and other racially motivated violence against
Black people prompted thousands of nationwide, overwhelmingly peaceful protests. Yet,
some public figures frame these protests as purely violent or destructive events. According to
Princeton University and the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project, 93% of the 7,760
demonstrations linked to the Black Lives Matter Movement in 2020 were peaceful.
Usage: Specificity and accuracy is important. Beware of any language that overemphasizes
looting, rioting or violence. The AHA denounces violence and supports the constitutional right
to protest peacefully.

blaming language
Definition: Language that, usually unintentionally, appears to place blame on people,
communities or populations for issues or health problems.
Usage: Avoid. Keep a sharp eye out for this type of language, which can appear inadvertently
based on longtime language practices. Instead, strive to make clear inequity is the reason
health disparities exist; these health problems don’t “just exist.” One simple tip to retain
context: When possible, explain how it happens before talking about who it happens to more
often.
Examples: Avoid constructions such as: Black people have higher blood pressure compared to
white people without further context. Instead, say something like this: Because of societal

barriers and systems that have harmed their health for decades, many Black people have
disproportionately high blood pressure. Sometimes space is limited and the context has to be
shortened, such as: Because of societal and historical inequities, many Black people have
disproportionately high blood pressure.

boy, girl
Usage: While technically accurate for anyone under age 18, exercise caution with these words.
Referring to Black males of any age and in any context as boys can be demeaning and
offensive. Referring to young adult females in any context as girls can be demeaning and
offensive.
Example: Don’t say this: Michael, a 15-year-old boy, is the team’s all-star player. Say this:

Michael, 15, is the team’s all-star player.

brown, brown people
Usage: These terms can be broad and imprecise racial, ethnic or cultural references. They’re
often best avoided in writing but are sometimes used by Hispanic, South Asian and other
people in speeches, presentations and discussions. These terms can be appropriate based on
context, messenger and audience. The terms also are appropriate as part of a formal name or
direct quotation.
Examples: This usage frequently appears in references to Black and brown people, often in
quotes: “We have to stop these discriminatory practices that are hurting the health of Black
and brown people,” the AHA volunteer said. In this instance, the context and messenger are
appropriate. But don’t do this: The study results indicated a lack of access for brown people,

the researchers said.
Updated May 2023

11

colorism
Definition: When someone with lighter skin is favored over someone with darker skin to favor
Westernized standards of beauty, privilege, etc. Colorism occurs within all races and in many
countries and geographic areas.

communities of color (REVISED)
Definition: A broad term for Black and/or Hispanic, Asian and Indigenous communities.
Usage: This term should generally be avoided because it’s very vague and it can imply that
there is some homogenous community of people when every community is different.
However, it’s a common term that may be necessary and appropriate. Specificity is always
best. This term can be appropriate based on context, messenger and audience. Avoid using
this term when referencing only Black people. Other terms that may work instead, if the
context is accurate:
•

specific terms for the communities discussed, such as Iraqi or Chilean (ideal)

•

partial listings if known: Black and Hispanic people, and other people

•

underrepresented racial and ethnic groups

•

excluded or historically excluded people

Example: The survey was sent to Black, Hispanic and other people who could be at risk for high
blood pressure. The writer used the known facts in this example. But don’t do this:
Communities of color are advocating for this measure. This usage assumes too much about
who comprises communities of color.

COVID-19 and anti-Asian racism
Definition: Asian American people endured a significant increase in racist attacks, both
physical and verbal, throughout the pandemic while prominent public figures have described
the coronavirus in racist terms. The scapegoating of Asian people during national crises is not
new, as this article recounts.
Usage: Do not repeat racist, xenophobic terms used by public figures. Also carefully consider
whether to add the origin of the virus in China to your communications. It’s fairly common
knowledge likely not relevant to general communications and could come across as
extraneous. The group Stop AAPI Hate tracks and regularly updates attacks against Asian
American and Pacific Islander people.

COVID-19 health disparities
Definition: The COVID-19 pandemic has taken a disproportionate toll on the health and wellbeing of Black, Hispanic, Indigenous and Asian people.
Usage: It’s important to retain the health equity context of COVID-19 in communications
whenever possible. While COVID-19 has impacted everyone, it has not done so equitably. This
CDC website offers good background. As always, be as specific as possible about who is
affected by these inequities, how and why.

Updated May 2023

12

critical race theory
Definition: This originated in the 1970s as an academic field of study focused on the impact of
race on the law, systems and institutions. Some public figures have used this term loosely —
and sometimes inaccurately — to describe a wide range of beliefs, diversity training programs
and educational curricula.
Usage: Because this term has become highly politicized, and the AHA is a nonpartisan
organization, we should avoid it in general references. If necessary to reference, provide the
full historic context defining the term.

cultural appropriation
Definition: When individuals or communities with privileged status adopt or co-opt — usually
without acknowledgment — cultural aspects of oppressed or underrepresented people. This
has included inventions, music, art and culture.
Usage: Context is important. Imitation also is flattery, but how that imitation is carried out is
important.
Examples: Widely acknowledged examples of cultural appropriation range from white models
wearing Native American headdresses to white musicians who claimed to have invented jazz
without acknowledging Black artists.

cultural representations
Definition: Stereotypes, images and narratives reinforced by media, commonly used
language, institutions and other mass communications. When portrayed accurately, they can
be positive. However, Black, Hispanic, Indigenous, Asian and other people are often
represented in dehumanizing ways through perpetuating and normalizing stereotypes 9.
Usage: Beware of such references slipping into language based on historic usage. When
writing about cultural representations, specifics are best.
Examples: Avoid references to any group having a “natural” ability.

disadvantaged (REVISED)
Definition: Not having advantages such as money, resources, education, power and other
opportunities.
Usage: Avoid this term as an adjective when talking about people and populations because it
can be condescending, framed as blaming language or have other negative connotations. It is
best to specifically show how a person or group has been disadvantaged. Other general terms
that may work instead, if accurate and in context:

•

specific terms for the communities discussed and how they are disadvantaged

•

disenfranchised often is a better option, acknowledging people have been
systematically placed at a disadvantage by others

•

underrepresented groups or underrepresented racial and ethnic groups (if race or

9

Fajardo-MDC F. LibGuides: Anti-Racism Teach-In: Glossary. Miami Date College-Libraries. Published November 5, 2020.
https://libraryguides.mdc.edu/c.php?g=1057388&p=7694504

Updated May 2023

13

ethnicity is applicable) and how they are disadvantaged.

•

excluded or historically excluded people

Examples: Don’t do this: Disadvantaged people lack access to health care. This is OK: Historic
discrimination put the community at a financial disadvantage.

discounting
Definition: Language or actions that cause people to feel less valuable or less important.
Examples: Dismissing people’s concerns about microaggressions as oversensitive; referencing
white or Christian traditions or activities as mainstream or normal for everyone.

discrimination
Definition: Prejudicial treatment based on race, gender, age, sexual orientation or another
group, class or category to which people may belong. Discrimination can be overt and covert,
including microaggressions, indirect or subtle behaviors such as comments reflecting negative
attitudes or beliefs about a non-majority group3.
Examples: Hiring, firing, promoting and other workplace decisions; decisions about funding or
conducting scientific research.

disinvested, under-invested
Definition: These terms refer to the fact that neighborhoods, schools, institutions and
communities have been historically excluded from equitable distribution of resources.
Disinvestment means to reduce or stop funding. Under-investment means insufficient
investment.
Usage: As always, specificity is best, so the ideal is to describe how a group or place has been
disinvested or under-invested rather than using these terms. However, these terms can help
avoid language that places blame on communities or populations, with past tense indicating
the historic aspect.
Examples: These neighborhoods are struggling with access to healthy food because of under-

investment. Because of a lack of investment, access to healthy foods is a problem.

diversity
Definition: Diversity implies an appreciation of differences that make up a community, nation
or other grouping. Diversity is usually discussed in terms of background, race, ethnicity,
gender, religion, sexual orientation, geography, disabilities, veteran status and diversity of job
type (physicians, researchers, etc.).
Usage: At the AHA, we reference diversity and inclusion, because including all people goes
hand in hand with diversity. In writing for general audiences, diversity is a well-understood
term that typically doesn’t need definition. If in doubt for your audience, define.

Driving Health Equity in the Workplace
Definition: A report from the American Heart Association’s CEO Roundtable dedicated to
helping employers further understand, identify and eliminate workplace practices that lead to
inequities based on race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, age, ability, veteran status or
other factors. The report includes actionable strategies that employers can use regardless of
Updated May 2023

14

where they are in their health equity journey.

empowerment (REVISED)
Definition: Authority or power given to someone to do something. In public health, the term is
often used to describe communities or groups of people working on health solutions.
Empowered communities will exercise more influence over public policy and tools to overcome
structural and institutional barriers to equitable health, including health care, nutrition,
education, economic development and housing.
Usage: Make clear that the American Heart Association frames empowerment as something
that comes from within the communities — not from the AHA. When framed as from the AHA,
it can come across as savior language. We don’t empower anyone, and people don’t NEED us
to be empowered. Rather than using the term empowerment, consider focusing on:
- The transfer of power and resources, which results in greater agency.
- The power comes from within the community, rather than it being bestowed upon by
others.
- Self-determination and control over issues that affect their lives and communities.
Examples: Do this: Nonprofit Group XYZ is empowering people within its community to access
more healthy options. Don’t do this: The American Heart Association has empowered the
community through our support of Nonprofit Group XYZ.

equality, equity (REVISED)
Definitions: Equality is the idea of people experiencing or receiving the exact same amount
of something. Equity occurs when people experience or receive something based on what’s
needed — which may not be equal — to achieve the desired outcome. These infographics
give some examples to help visualize the difference between health equality and equity.
Example: Everyone having the right to purchase healthy foods is equality. But when
trying to obtain those healthy foods, equity does not exist because of obstacles such as
access, price and availability.

excluded people, historically excluded people
Definition: These terms include varied populations that have been excluded from full rights,
privileges and opportunities.
Usage: Sometimes used to describe a broad group of people facing inequities based on
race, ethnicity, gender, age, sexual identity, ability, age, veteran status or other factors.
These terms are acceptable when specific language is not possible. Saying what people
are being excluded from makes the term easier for readers to understand.
Examples: People from Southeast Asia have been historically excluded from the state’s

politics. The measure is intended to help all people who have been historically excluded from
access to affordable care.

fair, fairness
Usage: Be careful with these terms, which are usually not appropriate in discussions of
equity because they are relative. Fairness depends on your vantage point. These words also
don’t acknowledge that structural racism is unfair.

Updated May 2023

15

gaslighting (NEW)
Definitions: Gaslighting is a method of gaining control over someone else. It works by
breaking down a person’s trust in themselves while increasing how much they trust or depend
on the abusive person. Gaslighting is a form of psychological and/or emotional abuse in
which a person or group causes someone to question their own sanity, memories or
perception of reality. People who experience gaslighting may feel confused, anxious, or as
though they cannot trust themselves. Over time emotional abuse may escalate into physical
violence. Even if the abuse does not become physical, gaslighting can significantly undermine
a person’s self-esteem and mental health.
Usage: Gaslighting can operate on a broad scale as a feature of systemic oppression. People
in power sometimes use it to damage the credibility of a person or group, which disempowers
them. Gaslighting can occur in any type of interaction but is especially common in
relationships as well as in these areas:
- Racial gaslighting: when people apply gaslighting techniques to an entire racial or
ethnic group.
- Political gaslighting: when a political group or figure lies or manipulates information to
control people.
- Institutional gaslighting: within a company, organization or institution to portray
people as irrational or incompetent.
Examples: Questioning a person’s memory: Are you sure about that? I think you’re forgetting
what really happened. Pretending not to understand the conversation: Are you just trying to
confuse me? I don’t know what you’re talking about. Belittling or disregarding how someone
feels: You’re just being too sensitive. Refusing to take responsibility for their actions: If it
weren’t for Joe, I wouldn’t have done it. Questioning the other person’s credibility: You can’t
believe what you read — it’s nonsense. Using negative stereotypes: She’s a woman — no one

will believe her.

genocide
Definition: The deliberate and systematic destruction of a racial, political or cultural group.
Example: A significant example of genocide in the United States is the treatment of Native
Americans. Millions were slain, their land was taken from them, and they were forced to
relocate and live in unfamiliar areas not conducive to their way of life or culture.

gentrification
Definition: When an area that has historically experienced underinvestment and underresourcing, usually in a city, experiences an influx of middle-class or wealthy people who
renovate and rebuild homes and businesses. This drives up property taxes, the cost of living
and housing insecurity. Gentrification usually has a negative impact on the social
determinants of health for those displaced or financially strained — often Black and Latino
people.
Usage: The term can be loaded and may not be understood by all audiences. Define the word
and its ramifications if you use it. This may be difficult to explain succinctly, but the context is
important.
Example: As wealthier people bought property nearby and property values increased, many

families found themselves struggling to make ends meet. This is an example of gentrification,
Updated May 2023

16

which often results in displacement, housing insecurity and health problems in communities
that historically have lacked investment.

ghetto, inner city, urban (NEW)
Usage: Avoid these terms when describing people, systems, communities, populations and
culture. The terms are acceptable strictly in a geographic sense, as we use rural and suburban.
Examples: Don’t say: About 60% of Black people in Anytown, New York, reported that it was
difficult for them to find healthy foods in the inner city where they live. Say: About 60% of

Black people reported that it was difficult for them to find healthy foods in their communities
in Anytown, New York. Don’t’ say: The lack of access to quality health care in the ghettos of
Chicago is staggering compared to those in white communities. Say: The lack of access to
quality health care in Black communities in Chicago is staggering compared to those in white
communities in the city.

hate crime
Definition: The FBI defines a hate crime as a “criminal offense against a person or property
motivated in whole or in part by an offender’s bias against a race, religion, disability, sexual
orientation, ethnicity, gender or gender identity.”
Usage: Avoid this, as it is a specific legal term. Use should be in the context of official charges,
so ensure accuracy before using.

health care disparities
Definition: Differences between groups in health insurance coverage, access to and use of
care, quality of care, and outcomes related specifically to care. Race, ethnicity, sex, sexual
identity, age, education level, disability, socioeconomic status and geography contribute
to these disparities 10.

health care provider
Usage: Avoid health care provider because it can imply people, communities or populations
need to be provided for. Health care professional, doctor, doctor’s office or clinic are better for
consumers. For medical and scientific audiences, clinician, physician or members of the health
care team are all acceptable.
health disparities
Definition: Health differences among groups of people closely linked with social, economic,
and environmental disadvantage. Health disparities adversely affect people who have
systematically experienced greater obstacles to health when measured by race, ethnicity,
gender, sexual orientation, age, ability, veteran status or other factors.
Example: Two factors leading to health disparities are lack of access to quality education and
lack of access to medical care.

10
Artiga S, Orgera K, Pham O. Disparities in Health and Health Care: Five Key Questions and Answers. KFF-Filling the
need for trusted information on national health issues. Published March 4, 2020. https://www.kff.org/racialequity-and-health- policy/issue-brief/disparities-in-health-and-health-care-five-key-questions-and-answers/

Updated May 2023

17

health equity, health inequities (REVISED)
Definition: Health equity would be achieved if all people had the just opportunity to be
healthy. The AHA’s official statement on health equity reads:

Everyone deserves an optimal and just opportunity to be healthy, giving
special attention to the needs of those at greatest risk of poor health and no
one is disadvantaged from achieving their potential because of social
position or any other socially defined circumstance.
Achieving health equity requires removing structural, unjust obstacles such as racism, poverty,
discrimination and their consequences. Those consequences include powerlessness and lack of
access to good jobs with fair pay; quality education and housing; safe environments; and
health care. Health inequities are systematic differences in the health status of different
groups, and they have significant social and economic costs to individuals and societies.
Usage: These are common terms but define them for audiences, as needed. In situations
where health inequities and structural racism are clearly linked, make sure to communicate
them together, ideally with historical context included. Health equity is usually written as a
singular term because it is a concept. Health inequities is usually plural because there are
many more specific inequities. Use a health equity lens for creating inclusive communication.
Example: The neighborhood didn’t offer access to healthy foods, one of the health inequities

residents faced because of structural racism.

Hispanic-serving institution
Definition: An institution of higher learning with at least 25% Hispanic students enrolled as
full-time undergraduate students. The American Heart Association’s Hispanic-Serving
Institutions Scholars Program serves as a pipeline for diverse researchers and health care
professionals through academic and career-enriching resources, including scholarships and
mentoring for undergraduate students.

historically Black colleges and universities
Definition: These institutions are described by the Higher Education Act of 1965 as any
historically Black college or university that was established prior to 1964, whose principal
mission was, and is, the education of Black Americans. HBCUs are open to all students,
regardless of race.
Usage: Spell out on first reference. HBCUs is acceptable on second reference.

immigration status
Usage: Only mention a person’s immigration status if it’s central to the story or
communication. Exercise caution because there is not one word or phrase that accurately
depicts every person’s immigration status. Avoid illegal immigrant and the offensive terms
illegal alien and illegal as a noun. Use illegal only to refer to a specific action, not a person.
Example: Say this: The man was arrested on suspicion of crossing the border illegally. Don’t
say this: The man was arrested at the border as an illegal immigrant.

Updated May 2023

18

intersectional, intersectionality (REVISED)
Definition: The concept of intersectionality describes the interconnected nature in which
systems of inequality, including race, ethnicity, disability, sexual orientation and gender,
overlap to create interdependent systems of discrimination or disadvantage.
Usage: If using these terms, briefly define for audiences as needed.
Examples: There are many possible variations of intersectionality. For example, a person who
is Hispanic and also part of the LGBTQ+ community faces the inequities common to both
groups. A Black person who is disabled faces inequities common to both groups.

Jim Crow laws
Definition: State and local statutes legalizing racial segregation, denying Black people the
right to vote, hold jobs, get an education or other everyday opportunities. People who tried to
defy Jim Crow laws often faced arrest, fines, jail sentences, mob violence and murder. The
laws existed about 100 years, from the post-Civil War era until 1968. The laws were named
after a Black minstrel show character.

Juneteenth
Definition: Juneteenth is the traditional commemoration date of the emancipation of
enslaved people in the United States. The holiday also has been called Juneteenth
Independence Day or Freedom Day. President Abraham Lincoln first issued the Emancipation
Proclamation declaring all slaves free in Confederate territory on Sept. 22, 1862. Word of the
proclamation reached Texas on June 19, 1865 — more than two and a half years later and two
months after the end of the Civil War on April 9, 1865.
Usage: Briefly explain the origins of this term for audiences who may be unfamiliar with
the term or its significance.

justice
Definitions: The quality of being moral, right and equitable. This word appears often in
references to structural racism, including:

• criminal justice: Avoid when describing the system of law enforcement,
courts and prisons. Instead use justice system so as not to imply people
within it are criminals.

• education justice: Ensuring all students have access to equitable educational
opportunities for success, and a safe and positive learning environment. Many
audiences may not be familiar with this phrase. It’s best to show rather than
tell.
Example: The school in the mostly Latino neighborhood couldn’t invest in a new
gym because its property tax base was lower than that of neighboring schools.

• environmental justice: The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all
people with respect to development, implementation and enforcement of
environmental laws, regulations and policies.

Updated May 2023

19

Example: Industrial air pollution, often based in lower-income areas where

Black and Hispanic people live, has been linked to health problems.

• health justice: The condition in which everyone would have an equitable
opportunity to access affordable, quality care and resources to stay healthy.
Achieving health justice requires finding solutions to improve social
determinants of health such as poverty, education, employment, housing
and health insurance.

• immigrant justice: Ensuring the humane and legal rights of all immigrants,
refugees and asylum seekers in the United States.

• justice system: Use this instead of criminal justice system, to make clear that all
people in the system are not criminals. This is the system through which crimes
are identified and people are arrested, judged and punished. Black and
Hispanic people are disproportionately affected by this system. Statistics show
Black people are disproportionately stopped by police, arrested, killed by
police, convicted and sentenced more harshly than white people. Using
statistics to illustrate these inequities often is a powerful illustration.
Example: Several statistics point to structural racism in the justice system. For

example, Black people are stopped 87% more than white people in the city.

•

racial justice: This is the systematic fair treatment of people of all races,
resulting in equitable opportunities and outcomes for all. Racial justice is the
absence of discrimination and inequities, and the presence of systems and
supports to achieve and sustain racial equity.

•

social justice: A concept in which equity or justice is achieved in every aspect of
society rather than some aspects or for some people. A world organized around
social justice principles affords individuals and groups fair treatment and an
impartial share or distribution of society’s advantages and disadvantages.

leader
Usage: Avoid Black leader, Hispanic leader, Asian leader, Indigenous leader and similar
constructions. These terms imply one person speaks for an entire community or population.
When referring to a person in a leadership position, be specific about what the person
leads.

marginalized
Definition: Being treated as insignificant or peripheral. Historically marginalized refers to
individuals, groups and communities who historically and systematically have been denied
access to services, resources and power as a result of systemic, durable, and persistent racism,
discrimination and other forms of oppression. Structural historic marginalization has resulted
in poor outcomes in these areas: health, social, political, economic as well as overall increased
vulnerability to harm. Historically marginalized populations are often identified based on
their race, ethnicity, social-economic status, geography, religion, language, sexual identity

Updated May 2023

20

and disability.
Usage: Avoid these terms when describing people because it can come across as
condescending and have other negative connotations. Specificity is best: Describe how people
are being marginalized. However, it may be necessary and appropriate in context. If you do
use it, avoid the marginalized, and don’t use marginalized as an adjective. Don’t say
marginalized people or marginalized populations. Other terms that may work instead, if
accurate in context:

•

specific terms for the makeup of the communities discussed, and how they are
marginalized

•

partial listings if some populations are known, with language showing how the
groups were marginalized (Hispanic, Black and other people in the neighborhood)

•

underrepresented groups or underrepresented racial and ethnic groups (if race or
ethnicity applies)

•

disenfranchised

•

excluded or historically excluded people

mass incarceration
Definition: The high number of prisoners per capita in the U.S., relative to comparable
countries, which includes a disproportionately high number of Black and Hispanic people. The
expansion of the corrections system has been called “the New Jim Crow” based on these
extreme racial disparities. The prison population has expanded since the late 1960s amid a
“law and order” movement and subsequent arrest rates and sentencing requirements in the
war on drugs. Mass incarceration has hurt the health and well-being of Black and Hispanic
people.

microaggressions
Definition: Everyday and often-subtle verbal, nonverbal and environmental slights, snubs or
insults that are intentional or unintentional. They communicate hostile, derogatory or
negative messages to Black, Latino, Asian, Indigenous people and other people 11.
Examples: Someone referencing all Latinos as from Mexico. Someone interrupting a Black
woman and talking over her. This article explores reactions to microaggressions, as does this
one.

11

Sue DW Ph.D. Microaggressions: More Than Just Race. Psychology Today. Published November 17, 2010.
http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/microaggressions-in-everyday-life/201011/microaggressions-more-just-race

Updated May 2023

21

minority, minorities
Usage: Avoid when talking about race and ethnicity, as it can be offensive and sometimes
inaccurate. Instead, be as specific as possible about race and ethnicity. There are times when
minority may be unavoidable, such as when it is part of a proper name (Office of Minority
Health, for example) or when applying for grants that use such language.
When the term cannot be avoided, add more specific language to describe precisely who is
included in that description.
If the term is used in a document that we have to follow, adjust the language if possible and
appropriate. For example, if a grant application uses minority but we are discussing a specific
community, use the more specific term and then depart from the use of minority. Example:

This Minority Health Grant would benefit South Asian people in Detroit. Many South Asian
neighborhoods cannot easily access affordable, nutritious food. South Asian people in Detroit
…”
If the term can be avoided and is used to describe race and ethnicity, instead use people of
underrepresented races and ethnicities. Or, if more appropriate, one of these suggestions:

•

specific races and ethnicities of the people discussed, if known

•

partial listings if known: Black, Hispanic people and other people

•

excluded or historically excluded people

Native American Serving Non-Tribal Institution (NEW)
Definition: A Native American Serving Non-Tribal Institution is an institution of higher
education that at the time of application is an eligible institution under section 312(b), has an
enrollment of undergraduates that is not less than 10 percent Native American students, and
is not a Tribal College or University. NASNTIs are not controlled by tribes, but rather a
university that serves a percentage of American Indian and Alaska Native students. The Native
American-serving Nontribal Institutions Program provides grants and related assistance to
Native American-serving, nontribal institutions to enable such institutions to improve and
expand their capacity to serve Native Americans and low-income individuals.
Usage: Spell out on first reference. NASNTI is acceptable on second reference.

non-white people
Usage: Avoid, as the term frames the discussion from a white-centric perspective. This term
has appeared in studies when comparing white people and everyone else. If other races and
ethnicities are not specified, these terms may work instead:

•

partial listings if known: Black, Hispanic people and other people

•

underrepresented racial and ethnic groups

•

excluded or historically excluded people

Updated May 2023

22

•

people of color

•

all racial and ethnic groups except white people (This would be used only in very
specific instances, such as studies comparing outcomes for all races and
ethnicities to the outcomes of white people.)

Examples: Hispanic patients in the study recovered more quickly, researchers found.

oppression
Definition: The unjust or cruel exercise of authority or power by those in authority. Oppression
is a central component of structural racism.
Usage: Don’t hedge or water down the term in proper context. However, exercise caution
based on your communication, as it is a sweeping and powerful word.
Examples: This usage works: Historic oppression of Native American people led to some of the
current health problems experienced by too many of them. This one does not: She felt it was

clearly oppression when the nurse asked whether she had seasonal allergies.

people of color (REVISED)
Definition: A broad term describing people who are not white.
Usage: Avoid this term in general. People of color is overly vague and can have the
connotation of people being lumped together as “other.” For some people, it also hits too
close to the dated and offensive term colored. Some Native Americans say the term does not
encompass their sovereign status, and some Black people do not include themselves in this
term due to historical treatment that does not apply to other racial demographics This term
can be acceptable when appropriate and used in context by an appropriate messenger.
However, it is always better to use specific terms. Do not use as a synonym for Black people.
Avoid the acronym POC. Other terms that may work, if accurate and in context:

•

specific terms for the communities discussed

•

partial listings if known: Black, Hispanic and other people

•

underrepresented racial and ethnic groups (assuming representation is accurate)

•

excluded or historically excluded people

Examples: The most specific is always best, when we know the facts: The legislation would be
harmful to Colombian residents in Chicago. Better than overly broad terms: The legislation
would be harmful to Black and Hispanic people. Acceptable if needed but try to include the
known details: The legislation would be harmful to the health of Black people and other
people.

phrases and terms with racist history
Definition: Several commonly used words and phrases celebrate, are influenced by or allude
to racist beliefs, events or practices. Many people are not aware of the offensive origins and do
not use them with ill intent.
Usage: When in doubt, find a way around these words. It’s always worth asking: Might this
offend someone? Err on the side of not offending.
Updated May 2023

23

Examples: Some common examples can be found throughout this guide. This article and
several links within it detail the history of some of these terms, including:
• cakewalk: Originated to describe gatherings in which enslaved people dressed up
and performed dances mocking wealthy white people. Later, white people in
blackface mocked these events at minstrel shows.
•

call a spade a spade: The word spade has been used as a racial slur.

•

cotton-picking: The term has racial overtones, particularly against Black people in
the South.

•

crack the whip: The whip is a powerful symbol of slavery, as the weapon was
commonly used to assault enslaved people. It’s best to err on the side of sensitivity
when considering use of the term whip.

•

grandfather clause, grandfathered-in: These terms come from one of the many
measures taken to stop Black people from voting after passage of the 15th
Amendment prohibited racial discrimination in voting. In such measures, only men
who were descendants of men who voted before 1867 — meaning white men —
were permitted to vote.

•

gyp, gypped, jip, jipped: Verbs used to indicate being cheated in a transaction,
based on the term gypsy, considered a slur against Roma people.

•

inner city (NEW): Most often used as a reference to generalize Black, Hispanic and
other people in high-need communities. Inner city is not a synonym for Black
neighborhoods. To refer to people living within a city, use metropolitan population
or city-dwellers. When referring to a lower income economic class, low-income or
high-need might be appropriate terminology.

•

long time, no see: Originated as a mockery of American Indian people who
weren’t familiar with English.

•

lynch mob: Used sometimes today to describe an angry crowd in general, but it
literally describes who lynched Black people. For decades, Black people in the
South were lynched with little to no consequences for people leading or in the
mobs.

•

master, slave: Even when not referencing slavery, the terms can and usually
should be avoided because of the historic symbolism. So much so that Twitter has
stopped using both terms, and the Houston Association of Realtors now describes
bedrooms as primary rather than master. Note: Master, when used alone in
relation to expertise or education rather than dominance over others, is
acceptable. For example, master’s degree, masterclass, Mission Mastery.

•

no can do: Began as a mockery of Chinese immigrants’ pidgin English.

•

off the reservation: Term originated for Native Americans considered rebellious
against white people because they left the land they were required to live on
because of their race.

Updated May 2023

24

•

peanut gallery: Originated with the cheap and inferior seats designated for Black
audiences at performances.

•

sold down the river: Alludes to the practice of slaves literally being sold down the
Mississippi and other rivers.

•

spirit animal: Used recently as a lighthearted, whimsical reference, this phrase is
offensive to many American Indians and Alaska Natives for whom a spirit animal
has specific and important meanings.

•

tipping point: This term became popular in the 1950s describing “white flight,”
when white people fled cities for segregated suburbs.

•

uppity: Used as a code word to indicate people — usually Black people — are
behaving with confidence beyond their social standing.

This article details examples of inclusive language in technology, such as using built-in

feature versus native feature and web product owner instead of webmaster.

police violence
Usage: Use specific language about what happened. For example, it is appropriate to say
George Floyd was murdered by police in Minneapolis in 2020. Don’t use the death of, or the
passing of George Floyd or other terms that soften what happened.

prejudice
Definition: Irrational or unjustifiable negative emotions or evaluations toward people3 from
other social groups, and a root cause of discriminatory behavior. Negative prejudices are
typically based on unsupported generalizations or stereotypes.
Usage: Be careful not to confuse prejudice and discrimination; prejudice is a way of thinking
and feeling, and discrimination is taking action based on prejudice or bias.

presidential advisory on structural racism
Definition: This 2020 document from an American Heart Association science writing group
found that structural racism is a principal driver of health disparities. The advisory details the
history of structural racism in the United States and calls for all of society — not just those
affected — to be accountable for addressing these issues.
Usage: The formal name is Call to Action: Structural Racism as a Fundamental Driver of
Health Disparities: A Presidential Advisory From The American Heart Association. However, it’s
acceptable in consumer and internal copy to reference it as the American Heart Association’s
presidential advisory on structural racism.

Updated May 2023

25

privilege, white privilege
Definitions: Privilege connotes access to resources, benefits and advantages for a dominant
social group but not for all. In the U.S., white people are generally unexposed to and
protected from many forms of discrimination and have more social and economic privilege.
Often, white people don’t acknowledge or are unaware of this privilege, which contributes to
unequal distribution of wealth, power and opportunity based on skin color 12.
Usage: Exercise caution with the term white privilege and use specific explanatory language
as needed.
Examples: Day-to-day examples of white privilege include: Not being followed in a store;
being able to drive a car in any neighborhood without being perceived as being in the wrong
place or looking for trouble; getting hired despite more-qualified candidates of other
ethnicities.

racial and ethnic comparisons
Usage: The American Heart Association often publishes results of studies or reports that
purposefully compare outcomes between white people and other populations, with the
important intention of shining a light on disparities and inequities. As a science-based
organization devoted to health equity, this is appropriate.
However, such language often unnecessarily seeps into other kinds of other writing when there
is no need for racial and ethnic comparisons. Here are some good ways to make the point
about disparities without using white people as a baseline:
•
•

•
•

Black people face disproportionately high rates of diabetes.
Indigenous people deal with higher rates of unhealthy cholesterol than most people in
the United States. (Note: Currently most people in the United States are white, so this
says the same thing without comparing races.)
Some South Asian people are diagnosed with disproportionately high rates of heart
disease.
Statistics show Hispanic people face disproportionately high rates of obesity.

In each of those examples there’s no need to compare to white people or anyone else. The
point is clearly made and the focus stays on the people or issue we are writing about.
The above examples are in a vacuum, and we should make every effort to add the proper
context although space sometimes gets in the way. This simple phrase is very helpful to
frame, when we are short on space to provide full context:

Because of societal, systemic and historical inequities, Black people in general face
disproportionately high rates of diabetes.

MP Associates, Center For Assessment And Policy Development. WWW.RACIALEQUITYTOOLS.ORG'S GLOSSARY, 2013.
https://www.racialequitytools.org/images/uploads/RET_Glossary913L.pdf

12

Updated May 2023

26

Racial Equity in Public Policy — A Message Guide
This Voices for Healthy Kids message guide for advocates advances conversations with
decision-makers on structural racism and embeds equity in policy language.

redlining
Definition: A government-backed discriminatory practice designed to segregate housing by
race and ethnicity. Redlining occurs when banks and other institutions refuse to offer
mortgages or offer worse rates to people who are not white. While outlawed in 1968, redlining
has enduring effects to this day in the form of wealth gaps and health disparities. The term
itself came from maps created for New Deal-era housing programs from the Federal Housing
Administration, created in 1934. The maps were color-coded to indicate where it was safe to
insure mortgages for white people. Places near or in predominantly Black neighborhoods were
colored red. At the time, during a large housing shortage, the FHA subsidized builders who
were mass-producing entire subdivisions that explicitly refused to allow Black Americans from
living there. Local governments often reinforced this segregation with their own rules and
policies. This video takes a creative approach to explain redlining in a simple way. In addition
to redlining, racial covenants were put into place. Racial covenants are clauses that were
inserted into property deeds to prevent people who were not white from buying or occupying
land. Racial covenants served as legally enforceable contracts. They stipulated that the
property had to remain in the hands of white people and could be enforced in perpetuity.
Usage: Define and explain the ramifications as needed for each audience.

reverse discrimination
Definition: The unfair treatment of members of the majority group based on race, gender,
national origin, abilities, sexual orientation or other traits, beliefs or groupings of people. 13
Usage: Avoid this term, instead using discrimination, which is accurate in any case, and be
specific when discussing such situations.
Example: Susan said she experienced discrimination because she is white.

savior language
Definition: Language that implies a group, community or population can’t solve major
problems without help from people or institutions. Although often used in reference to white
people or white-led institutions, it can occur between other racial groups.
Usage: Do not imply the American Heart Association is saving, serving, educating, rescuing or
otherwise swooping in because people need our help. Context is important (especially
because we often talk about the AHA saving lives).
Examples: There is a long history in charity, nonprofits, Hollywood, art and literature
advancing the “savior” theme, which reinforces structural racism and white supremacy.

13

On behalf of TDL Firm, P.L.L.C. Reverse discrimination in the workplace: What it is and what to do about it/The Devadoss
LawFirm, P.L.L.C. Published June 22, 2016. https://www.fedemploymentlaw.com/blog/2016/06/reverse-discrimination-in-theworkplace-what-it-is-and-what-to-do-about-it/

Updated May 2023

27

Here are some AHA usage examples: Do: Community members, working with the American
Heart Association, volunteered to try the nutrition program. Don’t: The American Heart

Association implemented the free program to teach people in the community about nutrition.
Do: Contact your health care professional. Don’t: Contact your health care provider. Provider
can come across as savior language.

slaves, enslaved people
Definition: The term slaves denotes an inherent identity of a person or people treated as
chattel or property. The term enslaved people underlines that the slave status has been
imposed on individuals.
Usage: Enslaved people is generally preferred for the AHA based on our overarching emphasis
of people over condition, although references to slaves is acceptable if the context is
appropriate. Avoid the term unless necessary as referring to institutional, criminal or
organized enslavement.

social exclusion
Definition: A state in which people or groups are assumed to be excluded from social systems
and relationships. In most definitions, this state is associated with extreme poverty and
disadvantage 14.

social determinants of health
Definition: The conditions in which people are born and live. The American Heart Association is
dedicated to improving the effects of the social determinants of health. The determinants are
shaped by the distribution of money, power and resources, and, when they are adverse, are
mostly responsible for avoidable differences in health status. Internally, we categorize these
determinants into five areas: economic stability; educational attainment; social cohesion;
infrastructure and environment; and health and health care. Specific social determinants
include:
• racial bias

•

income instability

•

education level and access

•

access to affordable, quality health care

•

access to affordable, quality health insurance

•

access to healthy foods

•

transportation options

•

clean, healthy environments

14
Popay J, Escorel S, Hernández M, Johnston H, Mathieson J, Rispel L. SEKN Final Report Understanding and Tackling Social
Exclusion Final Report tothe WHO Commission on Social Determinants of Health Fromthe Social ExclusionKnowledge Network On
Behalf of the WHO Social Exclusion Knowledge Network; 2008: Page 33, Second Paragraph.

https://www.who.int/social_determinants/knowledge_networks/final_reports/sekn_final%20report_042008.pdf?ua=1

Updated May 2023

28

•

social support

•

employment opportunities and job training

•

safety concerns

Usage: For consumer audiences, it is OK to use simpler and easier-to-understand terms if
needed, such as health risks, social health risks or environmental health risks in place of
social determinants of health. (This is similar to how we say myocardial infarction for
professionals and the simpler heart attack for consumers.) Ensure the definition and context
are accurate when using simpler language. When using the term social determinants of
health, always briefly define it. This simple definition is often enough: The conditions in
which people are born and live. Don’t use social influencers of health. Do not feel obligated
to mention everything about every determinant. This will make your content unfocused and
possibly confusing.
Examples: Many in the largely Egyptian neighborhood don’t have clean water to drink or safe

places to exercise. These social health risks have been shown to hurt people’s heart health and
emotional well-being. Many people are dealing with the effects of social determinants of
health, or the conditions in which they are born and live.

stereotype
Definition: An oversimplified opinion or judgment applied to an entire group of people.
Example: Believing that people, groups or events typify or conform to a pattern and lack
individuality.

Stop AAPI Hate
Definition: A movement started in March 2020 in response to a rise in anti-Asian bias and
racism during the COVID-19 pandemic. Stop AAPI Hate tracks and responds to incidents of
hate, violence, harassment, discrimination, shunning and child bullying against Asian
Americans and Pacific Islanders in the United States. Some prefer using the hashtag
#StopAsianHate.

tokenism
Definition: The policy or practice of making only a symbolic effort (as to desegregate 15).
Example: Hiring or appointing a Black or Hispanic person to represent ideas and cultures of a
community and falsely represent diversity.

toxic stress
Definition: Occurs when a person experiences strong, frequent and/or prolonged
adversity, such as from racism, physical or emotional abuse, exposure to violence and
chronic neglect. While studies show stress can have negative mental health and
cardiovascular side effects on everyone, pervasive exposure to structural racism and
discrimination can create additional daily stressors for Black, Hispanic, Asian, Indigenous
15

Webster M. Definition of TOKENISM. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/tokenism

Updated May 2023

29

and other people of color.
Example: The African American Women’s Heart and Health Study, which has been examining

links between racism and health since 2012, has measured physical responses to stress, such
as blood pressure and certain hormone levels.

underrepresented
Definition: Often an effective term when discussing communities and populations.
Usage: As always, specificity and context dictate the best usage, but this term often works
well when discussing less-specific groups. However, it’s very important to ensure it is
accurate in context. Sometimes the descriptors “historically” or “intentionally” make this
more accurate.
Examples: Black and Hispanic people are underrepresented in the field of cardiology.

Underrepresented racial and ethnic groups were considered in these statistics.

under-resourced
Definition: This refers to communities lacking in income, employment opportunities,
educational opportunities, access to care, access to healthy foods, safe places to exercise
and other resources.
Usage: Use only in a literal sense: When an area lacks resources, be specific about what is
lacking if possible. Exercise caution and carefully consider context; some usages can
inaccurately imply race or ethnicity.
Example: The community is under-resourced in terms of quality health care.

underserved
Usage: Avoid this term generally when describing people because it can have negative
connotations, as if people need to be served to succeed. It can be condescending and
support the negative “savior” idea. Under-resourced is usually a better option.
Underserved can sometimes be necessary and appropriate in context but avoid if
possible.
Example: The community is medically under-resourced (not underserved).

voter suppression
Definition: Any legal or extralegal measure or strategy to reduce voting or voter registration
by members of a racial group, political party or religious community. The overwhelming
majority of victims of voter suppression in the United States have been Black people.
Usage: Avoid language about political parties, as the American Heart Association is
nonpartisan.

vulnerable
Definition: Susceptible to physical or emotional harm, often in need of help or special care or
treatment.
Usage: Avoid this term in general when describing people because it can be vague,
condescending and imply some people need someone to save them. If context is appropriate
for use, don’t say the vulnerable or use vulnerable as an adjective. Avoid vulnerable people or
Updated May 2023

30

vulnerable populations. Instead, specifically describe how and why people are vulnerable.
Other terms that may work instead, if accurate in context:

•

specific terms for the communities discussed and why they are vulnerable

•

underrepresented groups or underrepresented racial and ethnic groups (whichever
is correct)

•

disenfranchised

•

excluded or historically excluded people

Examples: Acceptable: After the surgery, she felt emotionally vulnerable. Not acceptable:
People in the Lebanese neighborhood are vulnerable. In context, it can work with economic
and social vulnerabilities as well: Historical redlining leaves members of Black communities

vulnerable to housing insecurity.

war on drugs
Definition: A decades long government-led initiative aiming to stop illegal drug use,
distribution and trade by dramatically increasing prison sentences for drug dealers and users.
The movement started in the 1970s and is still evolving. The war on drugs has
disproportionately impacted Black, Hispanic and Native American people, as detailed here
and here.

weathering
Definition: Weathering refers to the cumulative toll on a person’s health from repeated racism,
discrimination and social adversity. These factors chip away at health over time, just as forces
of nature chip away at rocks in the geological use of the term weathering. The usage related
to health came about in the 1990s, from a researcher exploring the reasons why Black women
faced risks for unhealthy pregnancies years earlier than white women. The term later became
relevant to all Black adults. This story delves deeper.
Usage: If used, define the term as necessary for the audience.

white supremacy, white superiority
Definition: The idea that white people and the ideas, thoughts, beliefs and actions of white
people are superior to the ideas, thoughts, beliefs and actions of other people 16.
Usage: Often in our work we won’t need to reference these terms. But, when needed, exercise
caution. Be sure to provide context because some audiences may think only of extremist
groups with these terms.
Examples: This supremacy or superiority can be indistinguishable from U.S. culture or norms.
For example, definitions of normal, professional and effective can come from a perspective
that white people are superior.

16

Cogburn, CD Ph.D. Original Scholarship-Culture, Race and Health: Implications for Racial Inequities and Population Health.

The Milbank Quarterly-A Multidisciplinary Journal of Population Health and Health Policy. 2019; 97(3). doi: The Milbank
Quarterly, Vol. 97, No. 3, 2019 (pp. 736-761)

Updated May 2023

31

whiteness, white-centric
Definition: Characteristics and experiences generally associated with being white. Sociologists
believe the white perception as “normal” is directly connected to the correlating construct of
other races as inferior, foreign or “other” in society 17. Whiteness and normalization of white
racial identity throughout U.S. history has created a culture in which people who are not white
often are seen as inferior or abnormal 18. This is sometimes referred to as a white-centric view.
Usage: Be careful with language that make white people the “default people” and everyone
else as “others.” This language can easily sneak into text because of language historically
used. Avoid referencing common white experiences or cultural references to describe things
that are normal, good or bad. Or, phrasing such as most people.
Examples: Don’t say: Most people live in the suburbs. There also are examples from the world
of research finding discrimination against people who don’t “look white.”

woke, anti-woke (NEW)
Definition: A slang term that originally described enlightenment or awakening about issues of
racial and social justice, which can contribute to health disparities and other inequities. Some
people and groups use it in a derogatory sense, declaring themselves “anti-woke.” These
people and groups imply being woke is a negative thing and an overreaction to historical
racial and social issues.
Usage: Avoid using the term other than in direct quotations. If it is necessary, explain the
meaning.

Sources: Below is a list of many sources referenced for this guide, including some that also are

linked to or cited more specifically elsewhere in the document:

The Associated Press Stylebook, American Medical Association Manual of Style, American Public Health
Association, The Aspen Institute, Cato Institute, History.com, Internal Document: AHA Editorial Style
Guide, Internal Document: Health Equity Messaging Document, Internal Expertise: numerous reviews,
Kaiser Family Foundation, Katrina Reader Workshop, Miami Dade College, National Association of
Black Journalists, National Association of School Psychologists, National Museum of African American
History and Culture, The New York Times, Openresourceleadership.com, PBS, Psychologyresearchnet,
Psychology Today, Racial Equity Resource Guide, Racialequitytools.org, Sage Journals, The San Diego
Foundation, Southern Poverty Law Center, SUMOFUS Progressive Style Guide, Teaching for Diversity
and Social Justice, ThoughtCo, U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Equal Opportunity Employment Commission,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, U.S.
Department of Justice, Vanderbilt University, The Washington Post, W.K. Kellogg Foundation Racial
Resource Guide
17

Cole, NL Ph.D. The Definition of Whiteness in American Society. ThoughtCo. Published November 8, 2019.
https://www.thoughtco.com/whiteness-definition-3026743
18
Kunst JR, Dovidio JF, Dotsch R. White Look-Alikes: Mainstream Culture Adoption Makes Immigrants “Look” Phenotypically
White. SAGE journals. Published November 3, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167217739279

Updated May 2023

32

