Glossary: From the CDC Health Equity Style Guide for the COVID-19 Response: Principles and
Preferred Terms for Non-Stigmatizing, Bias-Free Language
Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University and
The Racial Equity Toolkit
Accountability: refers to the ways in which individuals and communities hold themselves to their goals
and actions and acknowledge the values and groups to which they are responsible.
To be accountable, one must be visible, with a transparent agenda and process. Invisibility defies
examination; it is, in fact, employed in order to avoid detection and examination. Accountability
demands commitment. It might be defined as “what kicks in when convenience runs out.” Accountability
requires some sense of urgency and becoming a true stakeholder in the outcome. Accountability can be
externally imposed (legal or organizational requirements), or internally applied (moral, relational,
faith-based, or recognized as some combination of the two) on a continuum from the institutional and
organizational level to the individual level. From a relational point of view, accountability is not always
doing it right. Sometimes it is really about what happens after it’s done wrong. SOURCE: Accountability
and White Anti-Racist Organizing: Stories from Our Work, Bonnie Berman Cushing with Lila Cabbil,
Margery Freeman, Jeff Hitchcock, and Kimberly Richards
Ally: Someone who makes the commitment and effort to recognize their privilege (based on gender,
class, race, sexual identity, etc.) and work in solidarity with oppressed groups in the struggle for justice.
Allies understand that it is in their own interest to end all forms of oppression, even those from which
they may benefit in concrete ways. (OpenSource Leadership Strategies, “The Dynamic System of Power,
Privilege and Oppressions.”) Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
Anti-Black: The Council for Democratizing Education defines anti-Blackness as being a two-part
formation that both voids Blackness of value, while systematically marginalizing Black people and their
issues. The first form of anti-Blackness is overt racism. Beneath this anti-Black racism is the covert
structural and systemic racism which categorically predetermines the socioeconomic status of Blacks in
this country. The structure is held in place by anti-Black policies, institutions, and ideologies.
The second form of anti-Blackness is the unethical disregard for anti-Black institutions and policies. This
disregard is the product of class, race, and/or gender privilege certain individuals experience due to
anti-Black institutions and policies. This form of anti-Blackness is protected by the first form of overt
racism.
SOURCE: The Movement for Black Lives
Anti-Racism is defined as the work of actively opposing racism by advocating for changes in political,
economic, and social life. Anti-racism tends to be an individualized approach and set up in opposition to
individual racist behaviors and impacts. SOURCE: Race Forward
Antiracist: A conscious decision to make frequent, consistent, equitable choices daily. These choices
require ongoing self-awareness and self-reflection as we move through life. In the absence of making
antiracist choices, we (un)consciously uphold aspects of white supremacy, white-dominant culture, and
unequal institutions and society. Being racist or antiracist is not about who you are; it is about what you
do. (National Museum of African American History and Culture, Taking about Race) Anti-Racism Toolkit:
Georgetown University

1

Antiracist idea: any idea that suggests the racial groups are equals in all of their apparent difference and
that there is nothing wrong with any racial group. Antiracists argue that that racist policies are the cause
of racial injustices. SOURCE: Ibram X Kendi, How to be an Antiracist, Random House, 2019
Assimilationist: One who is expressing the racist idea that a racial group is culturally or behaviorally
inferior and is supporting cultural or behavioral enrichment programs to develop that racial group.
SOURCE: Ibram X Kendi, How to be an Antiracist, Random House, 2019
Bigotry: Intolerant prejudice that glorifies one's own group and denigrates members of other groups.
SOURCE: National Conference for Community and Justice - St. Louis Region. Unpublished handout used
in the Dismantling Racism Institute program.
BIPOC: Black, Indigenous, People of Color, the term is used to highlight the unique relationship to
whiteness that Indigenous and Black (African Americans) people have, which shapes the experiences of
and relationship to white supremacy for all people of color within a U.S. context. (The BIPOC Movement)
Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
Black Lives Matter: A political movement to address systemic and state violence against African
Americans. Per the Black Lives Matter organizers: “In 2013, three radical Black organizers—Alicia Garza,
Patrisse Cullors, and Opal Tometi—created a Black-centered political will and movement building project
called #BlackLivesMatter. It was in response to the acquittal of Trayvon Martin’s murderer, George
Zimmerman. The project is now a member-led global network of more than 40 chapters. [Black Lives
Matter] members organize and build local power to intervene in violence inflicted on Black communities
by the state and vigilantes. Black Lives Matter is an ideological and political intervention in a world where
Black lives are systematically and intentionally targeted for demise. It is an affirmation of Black folks’
humanity, our contributions to this society, and our resilience in the face of deadly oppression.”
SOURCE: Black Lives Matter, “Herstory”
Caucusing: White people and people of color each have work to do separately and together. Caucuses
provide spaces for people to work within their own racial/ethnic groups. For white people, a caucus
provides time and space to work explicitly and intentionally on understanding white culture and white
privilege, and to increase one’s critical analysis around these concepts. A white caucus also puts the onus
on white people to teach each other about these ideas, rather than relying on people of color to teach
them (as often occurs in integrated spaces). For people of color, a caucus is a place to work with their
peers on their experiences of internalized racism, for healing and to work on liberation.
SOURCE: https://www.racialequitytools.org/act/strategies/caucus-affinity-groups
Collusion: When people act to perpetuate oppression or prevent others from working to eliminate
oppression. Example: Able-bodied people who object to strategies for making buildings accessible
because of the expense. SOURCE: Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice: A Sourcebook. Maurianne
Adams, Lee Anne Bell, and Pat Griffin, editors. Routledge, 1997.
Colonization: can be defined as some form of invasion, dispossession, and subjugation of a people. The
invasion need not be military; it can begin—or continue—as geographical intrusion in the form of
agricultural, urban, or industrial encroachments. The result of such incursion is the dispossession of vast
amounts of lands from the original inhabitants. This is often legalized after the fact. The long-term result
of such massive dispossession is institutionalized inequality. The colonizer/colonized relationship is by
nature an unequal one that benefits the colonizer at the expense of the colonized.
2

Ongoing and legacy Colonialism impact power relations in most of the world today. For example, white
supremacy as a philosophy was developed largely to justify European colonial exploitation of the Global
South (including enslaving African peoples, extracting resources from much of Asia and Latin America,
and enshrining cultural norms of whiteness as desirable both in colonizing and colonizer nations). See
also: Decolonization. SOURCE: Colonization and Racism. Film, Emma LaRocque, PhD. Aboriginal
Perspective. Also see Race and Colonialism, ed. Robert Ross and Indigeneity, Settler Colonialism, White
Supremacy Andrea Smith
Critical Race Theory: The Critical Race Theory movement considers many of the same issues that
conventional civil rights and ethnic studies take up but places them in a broader perspective that
includes economics, history, and even feelings and the unconscious. Unlike traditional civil rights, which
embraces incrementalism and step by step progress, critical race theory questions the very foundations
of the liberal order, including equality theory, legal reasoning, Enlightenment rationalism and principles
of constitutional law. SOURCE: Critical Race Theory: An Introduction By Richard Delgado, Jean Stefancic
NYU Press, 2001
Cultural Appropriation: Theft of cultural elements for one’s own use, commodification, or
profit—including symbols, art, language, customs, etc.—often without understanding,
acknowledgement, or respect for its value in the original culture. Results from the assumption of a
dominant (i.e., white) culture’s right to take other cultural elements. (Colours of Resistance Archive)
Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
Cultural misappropriation: distinguishes itself from the neutrality of cultural exchange, appreciation,
and appropriation because of the instance of colonialism and capitalism; cultural misappropriation
occurs when a cultural fixture of a marginalized culture/community is copied, mimicked, or recreated by
the dominant culture against the will of the original community and, above all else, commodified. One
can understand the use of “misappropriation” as a distinguishing tool because it assumes that there are
1) instances of neutral appropriation, 2) the specifically referenced instance is non-neutral and
problematic, even if benevolent in intention, 3) some act of theft or dishonest attribution has taken
place, and 4) moral judgement of the act of appropriation is subjective to the specific culture from which
is being engaged. SOURCE: Resources on What ‘Cultural Appropriation’ Is and Is not, Devyn Springer
Cultural racism refers to representations, messages and stories conveying the idea that behaviors and
values associated with white people or “whiteness” are automatically “better” or more “normal” than
those associated with other racially defined groups. Cultural racism shows up in advertising, movies,
history books, definitions of patriotism, and in policies and laws. Cultural racism is also a powerful force
in maintaining systems of internalized supremacy and internalized racism. It does that by influencing
collective beliefs about what constitutes appropriate behavior, what is seen as beautiful, and the value
placed on various forms of expression. All of these cultural norms and values in the U.S. have explicitly or
implicitly racialized ideals and assumptions (for example, what “nude” means as a color, which facial
features and body types are considered beautiful, which child-rearing practices are considered
appropriate.) SOURCE: http://racialequitytools.org/fundamentals/core-concepts#cultural
Culture: A social system of meaning and custom that is developed by a group of people to assure its
adaptation and survival. These groups are distinguished by a set of unspoken rules that shape values,
beliefs, habits, patterns of thinking, behaviors, and styles of communication. SOURCE: Institute for
Democratic Renewal and Project Change Anti-Racism Initiative. A Community Builder's Tool Kit.
3

Decolonization may be defined as the active resistance against colonial powers, and a shifting of power
towards political, economic, educational, cultural, psychic independence and power that originate from a
colonized nations’ own indigenous culture. This process occurs politically and also applies to personal
and societal psychic, cultural, political, agricultural, and educational deconstruction of colonial
oppression. Per Eve Tuck and K. Wayne Yang: “Decolonization doesn’t have a synonym”; it is not a
substitute for ‘human rights’ or ‘social justice’, though undoubtedly, they are connected in various ways.
Decolonization demands an Indigenous framework and a centering of Indigenous land, Indigenous
sovereignty, and Indigenous ways of thinking. SOURCE: The Movement for Black Lives. What Is
Decolonization and Why Does It Matter? Eric Ritskes
Diaspora: "the voluntary or forcible movement of peoples from their homelands into new regions...a
common element in all forms of diaspora; these are people who live outside their natal (or imagined
natal) territories and recognize that their traditional homelands are reflected deeply in the languages
they speak, religions they adopt, and the cultures they produce. SOURCE: “The Culture of Diasporas in
the Postcolonial Web” Leong Yew
Discrimination: 1. The unequal treatment of members of various groups based on race, gender, social
class, sexual orientation, physical ability, religion, and other categories.
[In the United States] the law makes it illegal to discriminate against someone on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, or sex. The law also makes it illegal to retaliate against a person because the
person complained about discrimination, filed a charge of discrimination, or participated in an
employment discrimination investigation or lawsuit. The law also requires that employers reasonably
accommodate applicants' and employees' sincerely held religious practices, unless doing so would
impose an undue hardship on the operation of the employer's business. SOURCE: Institute for
Democratic Renewal and Project Change Anti-Racism Initiative. A Community Builder's Tool Kit. U.S.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, “Laws Enforced by EEOC” Accessed June 28, 2013
Diversity: Diversity includes all the ways in which people differ, and it encompasses all the different
characteristics that make one individual or group different from another. It is all-inclusive and recognizes
everyone and every group as part of the diversity that should be valued. A broad definition includes not
only race, ethnicity, and gender — the groups that most often come to mind when the term "diversity" is
used — but also age, national origin, religion, disability, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status,
education, marital status, language, and physical appearance. It also involves different ideas,
perspectives, and values. It is important to note that many activists and thinkers critique diversity alone
as a strategy. For instance, Baltimore Racial Justice Action states: “Diversity is silent on the subject of
equity. In an anti-oppression context, therefore, the issue is not diversity, but rather equity. Often when
people talk about diversity, they are thinking only of the “non-dominant” groups.” SOURCE: UC Berkeley
Center for Equity, Inclusion and Diversity, Glossary of Terms. Baltimore Racial Justice Action
EDI: Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion
• Equity: A measure of fair treatment, opportunities, and outcomes across race, gender, class, and
other dynamics.
• Diversity: The range of human differences, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, gender,
gender identity, sexual orientation, age, social class, physical ability, or attributes, religious or
ethical values system, national origin, and political beliefs.
• Inclusion: Refers to the intentional, ongoing effort to ensure that diverse individuals fully
participate in all aspects of organizational work, including decision-making processes. It also refers
4

to the ways that diverse participants are valued as respected members of an organization and/or
community. (University of Washington Racial Equity Glossary) Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown
University
Ethnicity: A social construct that divides people into smaller social groups based on characteristics such
as shared sense of group membership, values, behavioral patterns, language, political and economic
interests, history, and ancestral geographical base. Examples of different ethnic groups are: Cape
Verdean, Haitian, African American (Black); Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese (Asian); Cherokee, Mohawk,
Navaho (Native American); Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican (Latino); Polish, Irish, and Swedish (White).
SOURCE: Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice: A Sourcebook. Maurianne Adams, Lee Anne Bell, and
Pat Griffin, editors. Routledge, 1997.
Health equity as the attainment of the highest level of health for all people. Achieving health equity
requires valuing everyone equally with focused and ongoing societal efforts to address avoidable
inequalities, historical and contemporary injustices, and the elimination of health and healthcare
disparities.1 Specifically, it requires prioritizing addressing obstacles to health, such as poverty,
discrimination, and their consequences, including lack of access to good jobs with fair pay, quality
education and housing, safe environments, and health care.2 For the purposes of measurement, OMHHE
recognizes that health equity means reducing and ultimately eliminating disparities in health and its
determinants that adversely affect groups that have been excluded or marginalized, and that these
groups are not static over time.2 (CDC)
Discrimination: The unjust or prejudicial treatment of different groups of people, including by age,
disability, ethnicity, gender, national origin, race, religion, sexual orientation, or other characteristics.
Discrimination exists in systems meant to protect well-being or health, such as health care, housing,
education, criminal justice, and finance. Discrimination can lead to chronic and toxic stress and shapes
social and economic factors that put some people at increased risk for adverse health outcomes. Types
of discrimination include ableism, ageism, homophobia, racism, and sexism. (CDC)
Diversity: An appreciation and respect for the many differences and similarities in our work. This
includes varied perspectives, approaches, and competencies of coworkers, partners, and populations we
serve. (CDC)
Health disparity: A particular type of health difference that is closely linked with social, economic,
and/or environmental disadvantage other characteristics historically linked to discrimination or
exclusion. Health disparities adversely affect groups of people who have systematically experienced
greater obstacles to health based on their racial or ethnic group; religion; socioeconomic status; gender;
age; mental health; cognitive, sensory, or physical disability; sexual orientation or gender identity; or
geographic location. (CDC)
Health inequity: A health difference or disparity that is unfair, unjust, and avoidable.3,4 (CDC)
Implicit Bias: Also known as unconscious or hidden bias, implicit biases are negative associations that
people unknowingly hold. They are expressed automatically, without conscious awareness. Many studies
have indicated that implicit biases affect individuals’ attitudes and actions, thus creating real-world
implications, even though individuals may not even be aware that those biases exist within themselves.
Notably, implicit biases have been shown to trump individuals’ stated commitments to equality and
5

fairness, thereby producing behavior that diverges from the explicit attitudes that many people profess.
(The Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity, Implicit Bias Review) Anti-Racism Toolkit:
Georgetown University
Inclusion/Inclusivity: A set of behaviors that authentically encourages individuals to feel valued for their
unique qualities and experience a sense of belonging and shared power. (CDC)
Inclusive diversity is a set of behaviors that promote collaboration within a diverse group. (CDC)
Indigeneity: Indigenous populations are composed of the existing descendants of the peoples who
inhabited the present territory of a country wholly or partially at the time when persons of a different
culture or ethnic origin arrived there from other parts of the world, overcame them, by conquest,
settlement or other means and reduced them to a non-dominant or colonial condition; who today live
more in conformity with their particular social, economic and cultural customs and traditions than with
the institutions of the country of which they now form part, under a state structure which incorporates
mainly national, social and cultural characteristics of other segments of the population which are
predominant. (Example: Maori in territory now defined as New Zealand; Mexicans in territory now
defined as Texas, California, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Nevada and parts of Colorado, Wyoming,
Kansas, and Oklahoma; Native American tribes in territory now defined as the United States).
SOURCE: United Nations Working Group for Indigenous Peoples
Intersectionality: The interconnected nature of social categorizations such as race, class, and gender as
they apply to a given individual or group, regarded as creating overlapping and interdependent systems
of discrimination or disadvantage.5 (CDC) A prism to see the interactive effects of various forms of
discrimination and disempowerment. It looks at the way that racism, many times, interacts with
patriarchy, heterosexism, classism, xenophobia—seeing that the overlapping vulnerabilities created by
these systems actually create specific kinds of challenges. (Critical race theorist Kimberlé Williams
Crenshaw to them. magazine) Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
Privilege: Unearned advantage, immunity, and social power held by members of a dominant group.
Racism: A system of structuring opportunity and assigning value based on the social interpretation of
how one looks (which is what we call "race"), that unfairly disadvantages some individuals and
communities, unfairly advantages other individuals and communities, and undermines realization of the
full potential of our whole society through the waste of human resources. Racism can be expressed on
three levels:6 (CDC)
Interpersonal/personally-mediated racism: Prejudice and discrimination, where prejudice is
differential assumptions about the abilities, motives, and intents of others by “race,” and
discrimination is differential actions towards others by “race.” These can be either intentional or
unintentional. (CDC)
Systemic/institutionalized/structural racism: Structures, policies, practices, and norms resulting in
differential access to the goods, services, and opportunities of society by “race” (e.g., how major
systems– the economy, politics, education, criminal justice, health, etc. – perpetuate unfair
advantage). (CDC)

6

Internalized racism: Acceptance by members of the stigmatized “races” of negative messages about
their own abilities and intrinsic worth. (CDC)
Institutionalized Racism: Occurs in an organization. These are discriminatory treatments, unfair policies,
or biased practices based on race that result in inequitable outcomes for whites over people of color and
extend considerably beyond prejudice. These institutional policies often never mention any racial group,
but the intent is to create advantages. Example: A school system where students of color are more
frequently distributed into the most crowded classrooms and underfunded schools and out of the
higher-resourced schools. (National Museum of African American History and Culture, Taking about
Race) Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
Microaggression: Brief, commonplace, subtle, or blatant daily verbal, behavior, or environmental
indignities, whether intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile, derogatory, or negative
racial slights and insults toward people of color. (University of Washington Racial Equity Glossary)
Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
Model Minority: A term created by sociologist William Peterson to describe the Japanese community,
whom he saw as being able to overcome oppression because of their cultural values.
While individuals employing the Model Minority trope may think they are being complimentary, in fact
the term is related to colorism and its root, anti-Blackness. The model minority myth creates an
understanding of ethnic groups, including Asian Americans, as a monolith, or as a mass whose parts
cannot be distinguished from each other. The model minority myth can be understood as a tool that
white supremacy uses to pit people of color against each other in order to protect its status.
SOURCE: Asian American Activism: The Continuing Struggle
Movement building: the effort of social change agents to engage power holders and the broader society
in addressing a systemic problem or injustice while promoting an alternative vision or solution.
Movement building requires a range of intersecting approaches through a set of distinct stages over a
long-term period of time. Through movement building, organizers can
● Propose solutions to the root causes of social problems;
● Enable people to exercise their collective power;
● Humanize groups that have been denied basic human rights and improve conditions for the
groups affected;
● Create structural change by building something larger than a particular organization or
campaign; and
● Promote visions and values for society based on fairness, justice and democracy
SOURCE: Roots: Building the Power of Communities of Color to Challenge Structural Racism. Akonadi
Foundation, 2010. (Definition from the Movement Strategy Center.)
Multicultural Competency: A process of learning about and becoming allies with people from other
cultures, thereby broadening our own understanding and ability to participate in a multicultural process.
The key element to becoming more culturally competent is respect for the ways that others live in and
organize the world and an openness to learn from them. SOURCE: Multicultural Competence, Paul Kivel,
2007.
Oppression: The systematic subjugation of one social group by a more powerful social group for the
social, economic, and political benefit of the more powerful social group. Rita Hardiman and Bailey
Jackson state that oppression exists when the following four conditions are found:
7

-

the oppressor group has the power to define reality for themselves and others,
the target groups take in and internalize the negative messages about them and end up
cooperating with the oppressors (thinking and acting like them),
- genocide, harassment, and discrimination are systematic and institutionalized, so that
individuals are not necessary to keep it going, and,
- members of both the oppressor and target groups are socialized to play their roles as normal
and correct.
- Oppression = Power + Prejudice
SOURCE: Dismantling Racism Works web workbook
POC: People of Color, often the preferred collective term for referring to non-white racial groups, rather
than “minorities.” Racial justice advocates have been using the term “people of color” (not to be
confused with the pejorative “colored people”) since the late 1970s as an inclusive and unifying frame
across different racial groups that are not white, to address racial inequities. While “people of color” can
be a politically useful term, and describes people with their own attributes (as opposed to what they are
not, e.g.: “non-white”), it is also important whenever possible to identify people through their own
racial/ethnic group, as each has its own distinct experience and meaning and may be more appropriate.
(Race Forward, "Race Reporting Guide") Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
Power is unequally distributed globally and in U.S. society; some individuals or groups wield greater
power than others, thereby allowing them greater access and control over resources. Wealth, whiteness,
citizenship, patriarchy, heterosexism, and education are a few key social mechanisms through which
power operates. Although power is often conceptualized as power over other individuals or groups,
other variations are power with (used in the context of building collective strength) and power within
(which references an individual’s internal strength). Learning to “see” and understand relations of power
is vital to organizing for progressive social change. Power may also be understood as the ability to
influence others and impose one’s beliefs. All power is relational, and the different relationships either
reinforce or disrupt one another. The importance of the concept of power to anti-racism is clear: racism
cannot be understood without understanding that power is not only an individual relationship but a
cultural one, and that power relationships are shifting constantly. Power can be used malignantly and
intentionally, but need not be, and individuals within a culture may benefit from power of which they are
unaware. SOURCE: Intergroup Resources, 2012 Alberta Civil Liberties Research Center
Prejudice: A pre-judgment or unjustifiable, and usually negative, attitude of one type of individual or
groups toward another group and its members. Such negative attitudes are typically based on
unsupported generalizations (or stereotypes) that deny the right of individual members of certain groups
to be recognized and treated as individuals with individual characteristics. SOURCE:
Institute for Democratic Renewal and Project Change Anti-Racism Initiative. A Community Builder's Tool
Kit.
Privilege: Unearned social power accorded by the formal and informal institutions of society to ALL
members of a dominant group (e.g. white privilege, male privilege, etc.). Privilege is usually invisible to
those who have it because we are taught not to see it, but nevertheless it puts them at an advantage
over those who do not have it. SOURCE: Colors of Resistance Archive Accessed June 28, 2013.

8

Race: For many people, it comes as a surprise that racial categorization schemes were invented by
scientists to support worldviews that viewed some groups of people as superior and some as inferior.
There are three important concepts linked to this fact:
- Race is a made-up social construct, and not an actual biological fact
- Race designations have changed over time. Some groups that are considered “white” in the
United States today were considered “non-white” in previous eras, in U.S. Census data and in
mass media and popular culture (for example, Irish, Italian, and Jewish people).
- The way in which racial categorizations are enforced (the shape of racism) has also changed over
time. For example, the racial designation of Asian American and Pacific Islander changed four
times in the 19th century. That is, they were defined at times as white and at other times as not
white. Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, as designated groups, have been used by whites at
different times in history to compete with African American labor.
SOURCE: PBS, Race: Power of an Illusion. Paul Kivel, Uprooting Racism: How White People Can Work for
Racial Justice (Gabriola Island, British Columbia: New Society Publishers, 2002), p.141.
Racial and Ethnic Identity: An individual's awareness and experience of being a member of a racial and
ethnic group; the racial and ethnic categories that an individual chooses to describe him or herself based
on such factors as biological heritage, physical appearance, cultural affiliation, early socialization, and
personal experience. SOURCE: Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice: A Sourcebook. Maurianne
Adams, Lee Anne Bell, and Pat Griffin, editors. Routledge, 1997.
Racial Equity: Racial equity is the condition that would be achieved if one's racial identity no longer
predicted, in a statistical sense, how one fares. When we use the term, we are thinking about racial
equity as one part of racial justice, and thus we also include work to address root causes of inequities
not just their manifestation. This includes elimination of policies, practices, attitudes, and cultural
messages that reinforce differential outcomes by race or fail to eliminate them. SOURCE: Center for
Assessment and Policy Development
Racial Healing: To restore to health or soundness; to repair or set right; to restore to spiritual Wholeness.
SOURCE: Racial Equity Resource Guide, W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Michael R. Wenger, 2012.
Racial Identity Development Theory: discusses how people in various racial groups and with multiracial
identities form their particular self-concept. It also describes some typical phases in remaking that
identity based on learning and awareness of systems of privilege and structural racism, cultural and
historical meanings attached to racial categories, and factors operating in the larger socio-historical level
(e.g. globalization, technology, immigration, and increasing multiracial population). SOURCE: New
Perspective on Racial Identity Development: Integrating Emerging Frameworks, Charmaine L.
Wijeyesinghe and Bailey W. Jackson, editors. NYU Press, 2012.
Racial inequity: when two or more racial groups are not standing on approximately equal footing. such
as the percentages of each ethnic group in terms of dropout rates, single family home ownership, access
to healthcare, etc. SOURCE: Ibram X Kendi, How to be an Antiracist, Random House, 2019
Racial Justice: The systematic fair treatment of people of all races, resulting in equitable opportunities
and outcomes for all. Racial justice—or racial equity—goes beyond “anti-racism.” It is not just the
absence of discrimination and inequities, but also the presence of deliberate systems and supports to
9

achieve and sustain racial equity through proactive and preventative measures. Racial Justice [is defined]
as the proactive reinforcement of policies, practices, attitudes, and actions that produce equitable
power, access, opportunities, treatment, impacts and outcomes for all. SOURCE: Race Forward, "Race
Reporting Guide" Catalytic Change: Lessons Learned from the Racial Justice Grantmaking Assessment
Report, Philanthropic Initiative for Racial Equity and Applied Research Center, 2009.
Racial Reconciliation involves three ideas: First, it recognizes that racism in America is both systemic and
institutionalized, with far–reaching effects on both political engagement and economic opportunities for
minorities. Second, reconciliation is engendered by empowering local communities through relationshipbuilding and truth–telling. Lastly, justice is the essential component of the conciliatory process—justice
that is best termed as restorative rather than retributive, while still maintaining its vital punitive
character. SOURCE: Position Statement on Reconciliation, The William Winters Institute for Racial
Reconciliation, 2007.
Racialization: is the very complex and contradictory process through which groups come to be
designated as being of a particular "race" and on that basis subjected to differential and/or unequal
treatment. Put simply, “racialization [is] the process of manufacturing and utilizing the notion of race in
any capacity” (Dalal, 2002, p. 27). While white people are also racialized, this process is often rendered
invisible or normative to those designated as white. As a result, white people may not see themselves as
part of a race but still maintain the authority to name and racialize "others." SOURCE: Calgary
Anti-Racism Resources
Reparations: States have a legal duty to acknowledge and address widespread or systematic human
rights violations, in cases where the state caused the violations or did not seriously try to prevent them.
Reparations initiatives seek to address the harms caused by these violations. They can take the form of
compensating for the losses suffered, which helps overcome some of the consequences of abuse. They
can also be future oriented—providing rehabilitation and a better life to victims—and help to change the
underlying causes of abuse. Reparations publicly affirm that victims are rights-holders entitled to
redress. SOURCE: International Center for Transitional Justice
Restorative Justice: a theory of justice that emphasizes repairing the harm caused by crime and conflict.
It places decisions in the hands of those who have been most affected by a wrongdoing, and gives equal
concern to the victim, the offender, and the surrounding community. Restorative responses are meant to
repair harm, heal broken relationships, and address the underlying reasons for the offense. Restorative
Justice emphasizes individual and collective accountability. Crime and conflict generate opportunities to
build community and increase grassroots power when restorative practices are employed. SOURCE: The
Movement for Black Lives
Settler colonialism: colonization in which colonizing powers create permanent or long-term settlement
on land owned and/or occupied by other peoples, often by force. This contrasts with colonialism where
colonizer’s focus only on extracting resources back to their countries of origin, for example. Settler
Colonialism typically includes oppressive governance, dismantling of indigenous cultural forms, and
enforcement of codes of superiority (such as white supremacy). Examples include white European
occupations of land in what is now the United States, Spain’s settlements throughout Latin America, and
the Apartheid government established by White Europeans in South Africa.

10

Per Dino Gillio-Whitaker, “Settler Colonialism may be said to be a structure, not an historic event, whose
endgame is always the elimination of the Natives in order to acquire their land, which it does in
countless seen and unseen ways. These techniques are woven throughout the US’s national discourse at
all levels of society. Manifest Destiny—that is, the US’s divinely sanctioned inevitability—is like a
computer program always operating unnoticeably in the background. In this program, genocide and land
dispossession are continually both justified and denied.” SOURCE: Settler Fragility: Why Settler Privilege
Is So Hard to Talk About, Dina Gilio-Whitaker
Social determinants of health: Conditions in the environments in which people are born, live, learn,
work, play, worship, and age that affect a wide range of health, functioning, and quality-of-life outcomes
and risks.7 (CDC)
Social exclusion or marginalization: A complex, multi-dimensional (economic, political, social, and
cultural) process when certain social groups have barriers to full participation in society that prevent
them from sharing the benefits of participation, affecting equity and social cohesion; places where they
live often have health-damaging lack of opportunities, access to resources, voice, or respect for rights
(e.g., lack of access to jobs and inadequate schools).
Stigma: Stigma is discrimination against an identifiable group of people, a place, or a nation. Stigma is
associated with a lack of knowledge, a need to blame someone, fears about disease and death, and
gossip that spreads rumors and myths.9
Stigmatizing language: Language that implicitly contains a negative judgement about the character of a
person or a group of people. It also may blame people for circumstances beyond their control. Such
language often contributes to disapproving views of, or discrimination against, a group of people.
Structural racialization: the dynamic process that creates cumulative and durable inequalities based on
race. Interactions between individuals are shaped by and reflect underlying and often hidden structures
that shape biases and create disparate outcomes even in the absence of racist actors or racist intentions.
The presence of structural racialization is evidenced by consistent differences in outcomes in education
attainment, family wealth and even life span. SOURCE: Systems Thinking and Race Workshop Summary.
john a. powell, Connie Cagampang Heller, and Fayza Bundalli. The California Endowment, 2011.
Structural Racism: The normalization and legitimization of an array of dynamics – historical, cultural,
institutional, and interpersonal – that routinely advantage Whites while producing cumulative and
chronic adverse outcomes for people of color. Structural racism encompasses the entire system of White
domination, diffused, and infused in all aspects of society including its history, culture, politics,
economics, and entire social fabric. Structural racism is more difficult to locate in a particular institution
because it involves the reinforcing effects of multiple institutions and cultural norms, past and present,
continually reproducing old and producing new forms of racism. Structural racism is the most profound
and pervasive form of racism – all other forms of racism emerge from structural racism.
For example, we can see structural racism in the many institutional, cultural, and structural factors that
contribute to lower life expectancy for African American and Native American men, compared to white
men. These include higher exposure to environmental toxins, dangerous jobs and unhealthy housing
stock, higher exposure to and more lethal consequences for reacting to violence, stress and racism,

11

lower rates of health care coverage, access and quality of care and systematic refusal by the nation to fix
these things.
SOURCE: Structural Racism for the Race and Public Policy Conference, Keith Lawrence, Aspen Institute on
Community Change and Terry Keleher, Applied Research Center.
Flipping the Script: White Privilege and Community Building. Maggie Potapchuk, Sally Leiderman, Donna
Bivens and Barbara Major. 2005.
Targeted universalism: setting universal goals pursued by targeted processes to achieve those goals.
Within a targeted universalism framework, universal goals are established for all groups concerned. The
strategies developed to achieve those goals are targeted, based upon how different groups are situated
within structures, culture, and across geographies to obtain the universal goal. Targeted universalism is
goal oriented, and the processes are directed in service of the explicit, universal goal. SOURCE: Targeted
Universalism: Policy & Practice A Primer, john a. powell, Stephen Menendian, Wendy Ake
White Fragility: A state in which even a minimum amount of racial stress becomes intolerable [for white
people], triggering a range of defensive moves. These moves include the outward display of emotions
such as anger, fear, and guilt, and behaviors such as argumentation, silence, and leaving the
stress-inducing situation. These behaviors, in turn, function to reinstate white racial equilibrium. (White
Fragility by Robin DiAngelo) Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
White Privilege: Refers to the unquestioned and unearned set of advantages, entitlements, benefits, and
choices bestowed on people solely because they are white. Generally white people who experience such
privilege do so without being conscious of it. ("White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack" by
Peggy McIntosh) Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
White Supremacy: A form of racism centered upon the belief that white people are superior to people of
other racial backgrounds and that whites should politically, economically, and socially dominate
non-whites. While often associated with violence perpetrated by the KKK and other white supremacist
groups, it also describes a political ideology and systemic oppression that perpetuates and maintains the
social, political, historical, and/or industrial White domination. (Race Forward, "Race Reporting Guide")
Anti-Racism Toolkit: Georgetown University
White Supremacy Culture: refers to the dominant, unquestioned standards of behavior and ways of
functioning embodied by the vast majority of institutions in the United States. These standards may be
seen as mainstream, dominant cultural practices; they have evolved from the United States’ history of
white supremacy. Because it is so normalized it can be hard to see, which only adds to its powerful hold.
In many ways, it is indistinguishable from what we might call U.S. culture or norms – a focus on
individuals over groups, for example, or an emphasis on the written word as a form of professional
communication. But it operates in even more subtle ways, by actually defining what “normal” is – and
likewise, what “professional,” “effective,” or even “good” is. In turn, white culture also defines what is
not good, “at risk,” or “unsustainable.” White culture values some ways – ways that are more familiar
and come more naturally to those from a white, western tradition – of thinking, behaving, deciding, and
knowing, while devaluing or rendering invisible other ways. And it does this without ever having to
explicitly say so... White supremacy culture is an artificial, historically constructed culture which
expresses, justifies, and binds together the United States white supremacy system. It is the glue that
12

binds together white-controlled institutions into systems and white-controlled systems into the global
white supremacy system. SOURCE: "Paying Attention to White Culture and Privilege: A Missing Link to
Advancing Racial Equity," by Gita Gulati-Partee and Maggie Potapchuk, The Foundation Review, Vol. 6:
Issue 1 (2014). Sharon Martinas and the Challenging White Supremacy Workshop
White: 1. The term white, referring to people, was created by Virginia slave owners and colonial rules in
the 17th century. It replaced terms like Christian and Englishman to distinguish European colonists from
Africans and indigenous peoples. European colonial powers established whiteness as a legal concept
after Bacon’s Rebellion in 1676, during which indentured servants of European and African descent had
united against the colonial elite. The legal distinction of white separated the servant class based on skin
color and continental origin. The creation of ‘whiteness’ meant giving privileges to some, while denying
them to others with the justification of biological and social inferiority.
2. Whiteness itself refers to the specific dimensions of racism that serve to elevate white people over
people of color. This definition counters the dominant representation of racism in mainstream education
as isolated in discrete behaviors that some individuals may or may not demonstrate, and goes beyond
naming specific privileges (McIntosh, 1988). Whites are theorized as actively shaped, affected, defined,
and elevated through their racialization and the individual and collective consciousness’ formed within it
(Whiteness is thus conceptualized as a constellation of processes and practices rather than as a discrete
entity (i.e. skin color alone). Whiteness is dynamic, relational, and operating at all times and on myriad
levels. These processes and practices include basic rights, values, beliefs, perspectives, and experiences
purported to be commonly shared by all, but which are actually only consistently afforded to white
people. SOURCE: Race: The Power of an Illusion, PBS; White Fragility, Robin DiAngelo

13

