Glossary of “Race and Racisms”
Book Citation: Golash-Boza, T. M. (2022). Race & Racisms : A Critical Approach (3rd
ed.). New York :Oxford University Press.
List of Glossary in this book (The bold words are the key concepts. The phrases
after them are the definitions.)
1851 Indian Appropriations Act Legislation that created reservations for Native Americans and
provided funds for tribes to relocate to these communal lands.
1871 Indian Appropriations Act Legislation that declared that the U.S. government would no
longer sign treaties with Native American tribes.
1882 Chinese Exclusion Act The first major piece of immigration legislation; it was overtly racist
in that it specifically prohibited Chinese laborers from entering the United States.
1887 Dawes Act Legislation that forced Native Americans to give up their communal lands and
claim individual ownership of their lands.
1934 Indian Reorganization Act Legislation that ended allotment and facilitated tribal selfgovernment to a degree.
1965 Immigration and Nationality Act Legislation that put an end to the racially biased quotas
set forth in the 1924 Oriental Exclusion Act and the Immigration Act of 1924. It set a universal
quota of 20,000 immigrants for every country in the world.
1984 Crime Control Act An act that established mandatory minimum sentences and eliminated
federal parole.
1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) A series of immigration provisions that (1)
offered a legalization option for undocumented workers living in the United States and (2)
imposed sanctions on employers who hired undocumented workers.
abstract liberalism The first of Bonilla-Silva’s “frames” of color-blind racism. It involves using
liberal ideas such as equality of opportunity or freedom of choice to explain or justify racial
inequality.
acculturation A process by which immigrants adopt the behaviors and preferences of the host
society.
achievement gap The disparate educational outcomes of White, Asian, Black, Latinx, and Native
American people.

acting White A term used to refer to non-White people who are perceived as behaving in ways
associated with White people.
adultify When a teacher or other authority figure interprets children’s behavior as if they were
adults.
affirmative action Policies and procedures designed to combat ongoing discrimination in
schools and the workplace.
Afrikaners Descendants of the Dutch colonists who settled in South Africa.
Allotment and Assimilation Period The oppression of Native Americans that took place from
the 1870s to the 1920s, when two-thirds of Native American lands were lost and indigenous
children were obliged to go to federal boarding schools where they were taught to shun their
native ways and languages.
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 Legislation that imposed even more mandatory minimum
sentences. Most significantly, it set a five-year mandatory minimum sentence for offenses
involving 100 grams of heroin, 500 grams of cocaine, or 5 grams of crack cocaine.
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 Act that included a five-year mandatory minimum sentence for
simple possession of crack cocaine, with no evidence of intent to sell.
anti-Semitism Discrimination, hostility, or prejudice against Jews.
Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act (AEDPA) 1996 legislation that, among other
provisions, eliminated judicial review of some deportation orders and required mandatory
detention for many noncitizens.
apartheid Legally enforced racial segregation that endured from 1948 to 1994 in South Africa.
asset-based social policy Proactive policy, at either the individual or structural level, designed to
help narrow the wealth gap.
assets Cash in the bank and the value of all property, not only land but also houses, cars, stocks
and bonds, and retirement savings.
assimilation A process whereby immigrants lose their ethnic distinctiveness and become part of
the mainstream.
banlieues The outskirts or suburbs of French cities.
beauty queue A concept explaining how sexism and racism interact to create a queue of women
ranging from the lightest to the darkest, in which the lightest get the most resources.
biological racism The idea that White people are genetically superior to non-White people.

birthright citizenship Also known as jus soli, the concept that citizenship is determined by
where one is born, not by the nationality, race, or citizenship of one’s parents.
Black Lives Matter A hashtag and movement aimed at ending anti-Black racism and violence in
all its permutations.
blockbusting A practice by which real estate agents use scare tactics to convince White people
to sell their homes so that realtors can purchase these homes and sell them to Black people for
a profit.
Boer War Also called the Second War of Freedom; a conflict from 1899 to 1902 in which the
British fought the Dutch to bring all of South Africa under British colonial power.
bracero program A U.S. government program that brought in temporary workers from Mexico
between 1942 and 1964.
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas Landmark 1954 U.S. Supreme Court decision in
which the Court determined that separate educational facilities were inherently unequal and in
violation of the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
Butterfly A stereotype of an Asian woman who is a demure, devoted, and submissive wife.
capitalism A profit-based economic system that produces inequality.
categorical exclusion A mechanism of labor market discrimination in which an applicant is not
given an opportunity to interview for a job because of his or her race.
Chinese Exclusion Act Legislation that denied Chinese laborers entry to the United States.
civil rights Government-sanctioned protections against discrimination.
civil rights movement A series of mass protests between about 1950 and 1980 aiming to
achieve racial equality in law and practice.
concentrated disadvantage When the population of a neighborhood consists entirely or almost
entirely of poor people.
collective Black People who are Black, as well as other groups that receive similar treatment as
Black people, such as Hmong or dark-skinned Puerto Ricans.
colonialism The practice of acquiring political control over another country, occupying it with
settlers, and exploiting it economically.
color-blind racism An ideology in which race is not explicitly acknowledged, but individual
prejudices, acts of racial discrimination, and structures of inequality work to benefit White
people.

color-blind universalism The idea that we should ignore skin color.
colorism The idea that, within races, lighter is better.
coloured According to South Africa’s 1950 Population Registration Act, a person who is not
White or native.
controlling images Raced, gendered, and classed depictions in the media that shape people’s
ideas of what African Americans are and are not.
critical race theory A way of understanding the world that centers the voices of people of color,
focuses on the eradication of racial oppression, and requires reflexive thinking.
cultural capital Cultural resources that offer social and other benefits.
cultural racism (Bonilla-Silva) The third of Bonilla-Silva’s “frames” of color-blind racism, relying
on culturally based explanations such as the idea that Black people live in poor neighborhoods
because they don’t work hard enough to get out of the ghetto.
cultural racism A way of thinking that attributes disadvantaged racial groups’ lack of prosperity
to their behavior and culture, rather than to structural factors.
cumulative disadvantage perspective A framework used to explain the increasing divergence
between Black and White health outcomes that focuses on how disadvantages accumulate over
the life course.
deindustrialization The process of decline in industrial activity in a region or economy that
involves a shift from a manufacturing to a service economy.
diaspora A dispersion of people from their original homeland.
discrimination The practice of treating people differently.
dissimilarity index Measure that describes the extent to which two groups—such as Black
people and White people—are found in equal proportions in all neighborhoods.
Dragon Lady A stereotype of an Asian woman as a sinister, crafty, and destructive seductress.
earnings gap Differences in annual earnings among groups.
embedded market A market economy embedded within interlocking systems of oppression and
privilege.
enlightened racism The idea that the United States is a land of opportunity and that African
Americans could do better if they only tried harder.

environmental justice Efforts to ensure the right to live in nontoxic neighborhoods, regardless
of race.
environmental racism Institutional policies and practices that differentially affect the health
outcomes or living conditions of people and communities based on race or color.
erotic capital A concept linking the attractiveness and sensuality of a woman to her skin color.
ethnic enclave economy Clusters of small businesses that primarily serve people of the same
ethnicity and work to facilitate the success of co-ethnics.
ethnicity Group identity based on notions of similar and shared history, culture, and kinship.
eugenics The practice of controlled breeding to increase the occurrence of desirable
characteristics in a population.
Federal Housing Administration (FHA) Government agency established in 1934 with the
purpose of bolstering the economy and, in particular, the construction industry.
Freedom Riders Civil rights activists who rode buses in 1961 to test the U.S. Supreme Court’s
ruling that segregation in interstate bus and rail stations was unconstitutional.
genocide The mass killing of a group of people, especially those of a particular ethnic or racial
group.
genotype Genetic makeup.
Gini coefficient A measure of inequality, with 0 representing perfect equality and 100
representing perfect inequality.
global color hierarchy A worldwide system in which White (or light) skin is privileged and
people—especially women—strive to become lighter.
hegemony When racial ideologies become so widely accepted that they become common
sense.
hidden curriculum Underlying curriculum designed to reflect and promote the interests of the
dominant class.
“Hispanic Paradox” The observation that even though Latinx people have, on average, a lower
socioeconomic status than White people, they have comparable health outcomes to Whitee
people.
historical construction An idea formed in a particular time and place.
honorary White People who are not considered White but can be treated as if they were White.

human capital Educational attainment, skills, and job experience.
human rights Universal rights such as access to health care, adequate housing, and education.
hypersegregation Instances of notably high levels of segregation.
hypodescent The idea that having any amount of Black ancestry makes you Black.
ideology A set of principles and ideas that benefit the dominant group.
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) 1996 legislation under
which legal permanent residents face mandatory deportation if they are convicted of
“aggravated felonies.”
Immigration Act of 1917 Legislation expanding the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act and denying
entry to the United States for anyone coming from the “Asiatic Barred Zone,” which included
India, Burma, the Malay States, Arabia, and Afghanistan.
Immigration Act of 1924/Johnson-Reed Act Legislation that greatly reduced U.S. immigration
from southern and eastern Europe by introducing quotas, or limits on the number of people
from these countries who were allowed entry.
implicit bias Unreasoned judgmental inclinations that operate without our conscious
awareness.
Indian Removal Act of 1830 Act that enabled the administration of U.S. president Andrew
Jackson to use military power to displace at least 70,000 Native Americans, killing tens of
thousands in the process.
individual racism When one person discriminates against another on the basis of race or
ethnicity.
institutional agent A person who occupies a position of power and is able to access or negotiate
resources for others.
institutional racism Policies, laws, and institutions that reproduce racial inequalities.
intelligence testing The attempt to quantify intellectual ability using scientific measures.
intersectionality A simultaneous look at multiple forms of oppression, such as race, ethnicity,
class, and gender oppression.
Islamophobia Systematic marginalization of Muslims.
isolation index Measure that compares a neighborhood’s demographics against citywide
demographics.

Jezebel A name with biblical origins that has come to signify a stereotypically oversexed or
hypersexual Black woman.
Jim Crow laws A system of laws passed in the late 1800s denying non-White people equality.
Johnson-Reed Act of 1924 Legislation that made passports and visas a requirement for entry to
the United States and established national-origin quotas for European immigrants. The act was
overtly racist in that it was designed to increase the Nordic population in the United States and
put a stop to the growth of other groups.
legal permanent resident A foreign national who is granted the right to remain in the United
States and who will be eligible for naturalization after a period of three to five years.
les sans-papiers Literally, “those without papers”; undocumented migrants in France.
life-course perspective A framework used to explain how health outcomes change over the life
course.
Mammy A stereotypical image of a Black maid.
McCarran Internal Security Act A 1950 U.S. law designed to combat Communism. It required
members of the Communist Party in the United States to register with the federal government,
and it allowed for the deportation of foreign nationals who were members of the Communist
Party.
meme An idea, image, video, or phrase that spreads in a culture.
Mendez v. Westminster A 1947 California federal circuit court case ruling that segregating
Mexican American children was unconstitutional.
mestiçagem The Portuguese word for racial mixing.
mestizo A Latin American classification of people of European and indigenous ancestry.
minimization of racism The fourth “frame” of color-blind racism, suggesting that discrimination
is no longer a central factor affecting life chances for people of color.
“model minority” myth The stereotype that Asians are the racial minority group that has
“made it” in the United States.
mulatto The progeny of Black people and White people; a class of mixed-race people who are
darker than White people but lighter than Black people.
multiracial A person whose parents identify with different racial groups.

nativism The presumed superiority of native-born citizens, favoring the allocation of resources
to them over immigrants and promoting a fear of foreign cultures.
naturalization The process whereby people become citizens of a country where they do not
have birthright citizenship.
naturalization (Bonilla-Silva) The second “frame” of color-blind racism, which permits people to
explain racial phenomena as if they were natural.
Naturalization Law of 1790 The first piece of U.S. legislation relating to the foreign-born, stating
that only free White persons who had lived in the United States for at least two years were
eligible for citizenship.
neoliberalism The ideology that open markets, liberalized trade, and privatization are the keys
to economic success.
new racism An ideology in which it is not acceptable to make overtly racist statements, yet
racial inequality persists.
Nuremberg Code Policy adopted by the U.S. Department of Defense in 1953 under which
research subjects have to be informed that participation is voluntary and be provided with
information about the nature, duration, and purpose of the research.
Operation Wetback Massive roundups of Mexicans by the U.S. Border Patrol from 1950 to
1954.
oppositional culture Signithia Fordham and John Ogbu’s (1986) thesis that Black children
receive signals from both the White and Black communities that lead them to reject schooling
as a route to success.
Oriental Exclusion Act 1924 legislation that expanded the Chinese Exclusion Act and prohibited
most immigration from Asia to the United States.
outsourcing The practice of moving jobs once held by Americans overseas, where cheaper labor
can be found.
pardo A Brazilian census category meaning racially “Brown.”
patriarchy A system of oppression that ensures male dominance in terms of power and
property.
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) 1996 legislation
that denied government services and benefits to legally present migrants.
phenotype Physical appearance.

pigmentocracy A society in which Black, Asian, and Latinx people have different social statuses
according to their skin color.
Plessy v. Ferguson 1896 U.S. Supreme Court decision in which the Court determined that state
laws requiring racial segregation in public facilities were constitutional, as long as they were
“separate but equal.”
Population Registration Act 1950 act that defined three racial groups in South Africa—White,
native, and coloured—and mandated that every citizen be issued identification specifying his or
her race.
predatory lender A pawnshop, payday lender, or check cashing service that charges very high
fees and interest rates.
prejudice The belief that people belong to distinct racial groups with innate hierarchical
differences that can be measured and judged.
prison-industrial complex The vast network of prisons, jails, courts, police officers, and other
elements that purport to reduce the amount of criminal activity in our society.
pseudoscience Beliefs or practices appearing to be scientific but not based on the scientific
method.
race A social construction to describe a group of people who share physical and cultural traits as
well as a common ancestry.
race-based job channeling A mechanism of labor market discrimination in which similarly
qualified applicants of different races are told they should apply for job openings at different
levels.
racial democracy A society in which color and ethnic differences do not affect life chances.
racial enclave economy An economy in which a business’s success is both shaped and limited by
the racial group membership of the business owner.
racial formation As defined by Michael Omi and Howard Winant (1994), “the sociohistorical
process by which racial categories are created, inhabited, transformed, and destroyed.”
racial ideology A set of principles and ideas that (1) divides people into racial groups and (2)
serves the interests of one group.
racial justice The creation of a society devoid of racial oppression.
racial microaggression Daily, commonplace insults and racial slights that cumulatively affect the
psychological well-being of people of color.

racial profiling The use of race or ethnicity as grounds for suspicion.
racial project As defined by Michael Omi and Howard Winant (1994), a way of giving meaning
to racial categories through cultural representations and social structures.
racialization The process by which people come to be recognized as part of a racial group.
racialized assimilation The process through which immigrants adopt the racial identities of their
host country.
racialized social systems societies structured by racial categorizations
racially restrictive covenants Contractual agreements that prevent the sale or lease of property
within an area to non-White people.
racism (1) The belief that races are populations of people whose physical differences are linked
to significant cultural and social differences and that these innate hierarchical differences can be
measured and judged. (2) The practice of subordinating races believed to be inferior.
Reaganomics The economic policies of former U.S. president Ronald Reagan, involving heavy
cuts to a wide variety of social programs across the country.
recognition The first of Yamamoto’s (2009) four dimensions of racial justice: recognizing the
harms created by racism.
reconstruction The third of Yamamoto’s (2009) four dimensions of racial justice: acting on the
knowledge that harm has been inflicted on racial groups.
redlining A practice where banks deny mortgages in areas where people of color live. (If you are
curious which areas of your city were redlined, you can find the redlining maps at the Mapping
Inequality website.)
reparations The fourth of Yamamoto’s (2009) four dimensions of racial justice: repairing
damage and providing restitution for past harms against racial groups.
residential segregation The separation of different groups of people into distinct
neighborhoods.
responsibility The second of Yamamoto’s (2009) four dimensions of racial justice:
acknowledging that someone is responsible for the harms inflicted on racial groups.
rhetorical strategy Way of expressing racist ideas without being labeled as racist.
Sapphire One of the main characters on the television show Amos ‘n’ Andy; the caricature of an
angry Black woman.

school-to-prison pipeline A set of practices that lead to children being funneled from public
schools into the juvenile and criminal justice system.
scientific racism The use of science or pseudoscience to reproduce and/or justify racial
inequalities.
segregation A policy of racial separation ensuring that White people have access to the best
opportunities and facilities.
segregation index Measure that describes the percentage of 88 percent non-White people who
would have to move in order for the city to be fully residentially integrated.
shifting standards A mechanism of labor market discrimination in which job applicants of
different races receive different responses despite similar levels of experience.
skills mismatch hypothesis The hypothesis that African American men in particular often do not
have the skills required to secure work in the current economy.
skin-color privilege The privilege of being considered more beautiful, intelligent, or otherwise
superior as a result of having lighter skin.
skin-color stratification A system in which resources such as income and status are distributed
unequally according to skin color.
slave codes Laws enacted in the 1660s that clearly spelled out the differences between African
slaves and European indentured servants.
social capital Relationships and networks that offer social and other benefits.
social construction An idea or way of viewing people based not on biological differences but on
social perceptions.
social isolation where poor people do not have access to role models, networks, and
opportunities because of concentrated disadvantage.
sociological theory of racism Sociological explanation for how racial inequality is created and
reproduced.
spatial mismatch hypothesis Hypothesis that African American families have been excluded
from buying homes in the suburbs where much of the job growth has occurred, thereby
creating a disconnect between where African Americans live and where the jobs are
concentrated.
split labor market A difference in the price of labor for two or more groups of laborers.

steering A practice by which real estate agents show homes in White neighborhoods only to
White people and homes in Black neighborhoods only to Black people.
stereotype A widely held but fixed and oversimplified image or idea of a type of person or thing.
sterilization racism Racist health care policies and practices that attempt to control the
reproductive capacities of women of color.
structural racism Interinstitutional interactions across time and space that reproduce racial
inequality.
structural violence government policies and practices that harm people
subprime loan High-interest loan to someone at high risk of defaulting.
symbolic violence As described by Pierre Bourdieu (1984), the power of a socially dominant
group to make its preferences, tastes, and norms appear to be superior to those of the
nondominant group.
systemic racism As defined by Joe Feagin (2001), a diverse assortment of racist practices,
encompassing daily microaggressions, deep-seated inequalities, historical inequalities, and antiBlack ideologies.
Trails of Tears The forced displacement of the Cherokee of Georgia, the Apalachicola of Florida,
the Peoria of Illinois, the Shawnee of Ohio, and a host of other tribes.
underemployment A category including jobless workers actively seeking work, people who are
working part time yet are available to work full time, and those who have looked for work in the
past year and yet are not actively seeking employment.
wage gap Differences in hourly earnings (wages) among racial groups.
wage of Whiteness As defined by W. E. B. DuBois in 1936, psychological benefits that White
workers received by aligning with the dominant group, their White bosses, as opposed to
developing working-class solidarity with recently freed Black slaves.
wealth The sum total of a person’s assets minus debt. Wealth is built up over a lifetime and
passed on to the next generation through inheritances.
weathering hypothesis A framework used to explain the increasing divergence between Black
and White health outcomes that focuses on how constant exposure to stress accelerates health
decline for Black people.
White person of color A person who appears to be White, yet identifies with a non-White
group.

White privilege The advantages inherent in being categorized as White.
White supremacy A system of racial stratification that places White people at the top of the
hierarchy.
whitening The process by which a person and his or her offspring become Whiter as a result of
social status and/or intermarriage.

