Glossary of “Race and Racisms”
Book Citation: The Psychology of Diversity: Beyond Prejudice and Racism, First Edition (2014).
James M. Jones, John F. Dovidio, and Deborah L. Vietze.
List of Glossary in this book (The bold words are the key concepts. The phrases
after them are the definitions.)
absolute values
Values that are right for everyone.
acculturation
Similar to socialization (see below) but focuses on acquiring knowledge and accepting a
different culture.
acculturative stress
The tension caused by the potential conflict between learning one’s own culture while adapting
to a new one.
affirmative action
Programs and policies used to address institutional bias. These are offered as proactive
remedies to reduce institutional disparities. Groups lagging in key social indicators are given an
opportunity to be considered for admission or a job if their qualifications merit such
consideration. Such actions are designed to minimize discrimination but some people perceive
them as a reverse form of bias.
American
Often used to mean U.S. citizens, but actually refers to all persons living in North, Central, and
South America.
Americans with Disabilities Act (1990)
A civil rights law that protects persons with disabilities from discrimination in hiring and wages,
and requires that reasonable accommodations be made available in the workplace.
amygdala
Within the forebrain, the amygdala is particularly important to how we react to others. The
amygdala is sensitive to novel people and objects, and it acts rapidly to signal a threat. When a
threat occurs, the amygdala initiates a series of processes that prepare a person for “fight or
flight.”

Arab Spring
In early spring 2011, citizens in several Arab nations rose up against years of illegitimate and
coercive power exercised by dictators through the use of torture, imprisonment, and murder.
attributional ambiguity
The uncertainty about whether negative treatment is the result of bias in other persons or
shortcomings in oneself. It has a strong effect on the responses of members of minority groups.
attribution bias
People explain the causes of behavior (attributions) with internal reasons (the person’s
personality or disposition) and/or external reasons (some situational influence). People
systematically make attributions in ways that make themselves, their group, and members of
their group appear in a positive light.
attribution processes
Because people do not have the capacity to process all the information around them, they tend
to use abstract basic principles to explain isolated facts. By thinking in terms of what causes a
behavior, people do not have to remember separate facts or incidents to feel that they
understand a person.
attribution theory
Explains how we come to understand the causes of people’s behavior, others’ as well as our
own. Early research on attribution theory demonstrated that the types of attributions people
make are greatly influenced by three dimensions: consensus, consistency, and distinctiveness.
authoritarian personality
The configuration of traits (e.g., respect for authority, intolerance of ambiguity) that produces a
personality prone to prejudice, involving a projection of unacceptable impulses (such as anger)
onto powerless out-group members.
aversive racism
How people resolve conflicting non-prejudiced explicit attitudes and implicit prejudice; applies
to everyday forms of discrimination cross-culturally (at least in Canada, England, and the
Netherlands, as well as the United States).
backlash
A negative compensatory response to members of socially devalued groups who display a
positive attribute. For example, women who demonstrate high competence tend to be

perceived as less warm, which can then be used as a justification for a negative reaction to
them.
beneficial diversity
Not only acceptance of differences among people, but a belief that those differences add value
to the contexts in which they occur—that organizations, society, and our country are better off
when they are diverse.
benevolent sexism
Favorable attitudes toward women are conditioned by their acceptance of men’s chivalrous,
protective paternalism while staying within prescribed gender roles, and this can have subtle
and adverse effects.
biological hierarchy
Biologically defined groups are judged to be superior (men) or inferior (Blacks) and their social
status is believed to be genetically determined (superiority and inferiority begins at birth).
Black identity
Associated with changes in how one views oneself, with the goal of acquiring a balanced
perspective on positive feelings about being Black, recognizing the potential bias directed
against you because you are Black, employing those positive feelings about yourself and your
group, and developing effective ways to cope with negative treatment. All demonstrated in a
large body of social psychological research.
blatant prejudice
A traditional and overt form of bias that involves the direct expression of negative attitudes
leading to discrimination.
both/and paradigm
People are both different in some aspects and the same in others. This approach emphasizes
inclusiveness more than divisiveness which is characterized by an either/or paradigm.
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954)
State laws that established separate public schools for Black and White students denied Black
children equal educational opportunities. The unanimous ruling stated that “separate
educational facilities are inherently unequal,” thus declaring that de jure, or legal, racial
segregation violated the Fourteenth Amendment. This ruling overturned the “separate but
equal” doctrine enunciated in the 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson decision.

category divide hypothesis
When there is conflict between two people from groups that are believed to be different in
essential ways, resolving such conflicts is made much more difficult.
cerebral cortex
The outermost layer of the brain, made up of two similar-looking halves called hemispheres.
The cerebral cortex is associated with three major functions: (a) analyzing and integrating
information from various senses; (b) higher-order thinking and abstract problem solving; and (c)
performing voluntary actions. When you look at a brain, you mainly see the cerebral cortex
because it covers the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain.
challenge response
When we mobilize our energy and become more involved or immersed in a task; a form of
positive engagement—when we try to rise to the occasion.
Chinese Exclusion Act
Passed by Congress in 1882, the Act excluded Chinese laborers from entering the United States.
The restriction was limited to 10 years but in 1892 the Geary Act extended and strengthened
the Chinese Exclusion Act for another 10 years. Ten years later it was extended indefinitely, but
finally repealed in 1943.
chronic egalitarian goals
Habitual ways of thinking that, when activated, inhibit even implicit biases that are normally
automatically activated.
Civil Rights Act (1964)
Ended legal discrimination on the basis of race, color, gender, religion, national origin.
cognitive consistency
A basic motivation to have one’s thoughts and beliefs fit together in a coherent way. When
there is a contradiction between beliefs or when new information challenges old knowledge,
people experience discomfort and strive to integrate and make sense of the discrepancy.
cognitive dissonance theory
Proposes that holding inconsistent thoughts or beliefs arouses psychological tension and
discomfort, which people strive to reduce, often by changing their attitudes to be more
consistent with their actions.

cognitive diversity
Reflects differences in patterns of thinking, analysis, perception, and point of view, including
perspectives, heuristics, interpretations, and predictions.
cognitive miser
The tendency of people to use mental shortcuts (e.g., generalizations) that reduce the effort
needed to process complex information in an efficient but not necessarily fully accurate way.
People are motivated to use mental shortcuts when their cognitive capacities are limited or
taxed.
collective identity
Acknowledging that you belong to a socially defined group and that being a member of that
group is important to how you define, describe, and feel about yourself.
collectivism
A theory whose proponents focus more on mutual obligations, relationships, and expectations
between themselves and groups to which they belong and who tend to subordinate their
interests to those of the group.
colorblind
An ideology emphasizing that group differences should be ignored and people should be
treated as individuals.
colorblind perspective
Proposes that although people do vary in skin color, it is irrelevant and should not be a basis for
making important decisions such as hiring for a job or admitting to a school. A colorblind
philosophy is not limited to race, but applies to the use of any group characteristic in decisionmaking.

Comfort v. Lynn School Committee
Beginning in 1988, the Lynn public school system used a voluntary plan to improve racial
diversity in its schools and eliminate minority isolation. Under the Lynn Plan, all students had
the unconditional right to attend their neighborhood school. However, students could transfer
out of their district school and into another if their transfer would have the effect of decreasing
racial isolation or increasing racial balance. Conversely, students could not transfer if doing so
would detract from either of these goals. As a result of the plan, the student bodies of Lynn

schools had become more racially diverse. Parents whose children were denied transfers on
race-conscious grounds challenged the transfer provisions of the Lynn Plan, claiming that those
provisions violate rights secured to them under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 2003, the U.S. District Court upheld the school district’s
transfer plan. However, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals reversed this ruling in
2004. The Lynn School Committee petitioned for a rehearing, and in June 2005 a full panel of
judges for the U.S. Court of Appeals upheld the Lynn plan.
common in-group identity model
The idea that it is possible to change the ways we think about others by changing the way we
think about their group membership. Emphasizing a common group membership can change
the way we typically think of others from an “us” versus “them” to a more inclusive
superordinate “we” connection.
compelling interest
As enunciated by Justice O’Connor, the legal basis for determining when and how taking race
into account may be used to further diversity objectives in higher education. In general terms, it
establishes that diversity has an important role to play in higher education.
confirmatory bias
The tendency to seek out information that is consistent with what we expect, dismissing
information that is inconsistent. Even if you are hesitant to allow initial attributions to color your
feelings and beliefs about another person, the expectations derived from these attributions
guide how you weigh subsequent information. The results are ultimately the same, however,
biased assessments of the other person that confirm the initial impression.
Confucian dynamism
Variable orientations toward the present (M-time: business time, work time, official) or the
future (P-time: playtime, dream time, or social time).
contact hypothesis (theory)
Formalized by Gordon Allport in 1954, this theory originally specified four conditions necessary
for intergroup interaction to reduce bias:
• equal status within the contact situation;
• intergroup cooperation;
• shared goals;

• support of authorities, laws, or customs.
More recently, two additional key conditions have been added:
• exchange of information that allows us to make personal connections during these
interactions;
• having at least one friend who is a member of the other group.
cooperative learning
Students work in groups to complete tasks collectively in order to reach academic goals. Less
competitive in nature than individual learning, students learning cooperatively capitalize on one
another’s resources and skills. It has been shown to be one of the most successful and
empirically supported methods for improving intergroup relations.
coping
Refers to a person’s conscious and intentional efforts to regulate behavior (emotion, thought,
physiology) or the environment in response to stressful events or circumstances.
correlations
A numerical index, ranging from -1.0 to +1.0, showing the strength and direction of relationship
between two variables. A stronger relationship is indicated by a value that deviates more from
0; the sign indicates with the relationship between the two variables is in the same direction (+)
or the opposite direction (-).
counter-stereotypic imaging
One of five bias-reducing techniques that involves imagining in detail counter-stereotypic other
people who do not fit the typical stereotypes of their group.
Cross Racial Identity Scale (CRIS)
A scale that measures the structure and development of racial identity in African Americans.
cultural bias
The belief that one’s cultural heritage is superior to that of other groups is normalized as part of
a society’s institutions and practices. In some cultures there is a defined social order that
promotes the superiority of one skin color, ethnicity, religion, gender, or sexual orientation over
others.
cultural diversity

Refers to the variety and extent of cultural differences that exist in a given setting, institution or
society, and the nature of the interactions that occur between and among them.
cultural inertia
The desire to avoid cultural change if it alters the status quo and forces you to change; or,
conversely, to ride the wave of change if it carries you to a better position in society.
cultural transmission (enculturation)
The process of learning one’s own culture, called cultural transmission or enculturation, involves
acquiring the knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values that enable a person to become a
functioning member of a society.
cultural universalities
Principles, activities, and other elements that all cultures share.
culture
The avenue through which we grow and learn. It is a primary influence on how we think, what
we value, what we feel, and how we behave. Culture is a set of tools, real and symbolic, that
allows us to share rituals, practices, and customs. This is true whether you conform to prevailing
cultural mores, ignore them, or rebel against them.
culture war
A clash between two competing ideas about what is moral, right and good for a society.
decategorization
Refers to when people identify themselves and others primarily as distinct individuals rather
than group members.
demographic diversity
Occurs when differences among people are based on social categories or social roles without
regard to their psychological salience for the person. These differences usually consist of the
same categories as identity diversity (see below).
dependent variable
The element that was hypothesized by a researcher to change or vary depending on the
independent variable that was manipulated.
descriptive statistics

Summary characteristics and general shape of the data the researcher has collected, such as the
mean (average) and standard deviation.
desegregation
Requiring schools to represent appropriate racial and ethnic diversity.
discrimination
Occurs when individuals are treated differently, and usually more negatively, because of their
membership in negatively valued groups. Discrimination may result from the actions of
individuals or the differential application of laws, social policies, or institutional practices.
disparate impact
Hiring outcomes that fail to meet the 80% selection ratio criterion. See also four-fifths rule.
displacement
The process by which an emotion (particularly anger) that is inhibited is redirected in the form
of behavior toward another target that was not responsible for arousing that emotion.
disruptive apprehension
The anxiety that accompanies the awareness you are in a stereotype-threating situation.
distributive justice
Concerns whether outcomes in the end are perceived as fair.
diversity
Refers to those characteristics that make us different from one another, including race, ethnicity,
gender, demographic differences, country of origin, our culture, sexual orientation, age, values,
political affiliation, socioeconomic status, and able-bodiedness. Psychological tendencies,
abilities, or preferences also mark diversity.
diversity interactions
One of Milem’s three interrelated ways to view diversity: exchanges between and among people
who are different.
diversity-related initiatives
One of Milem’s three interrelated ways to view diversity: cultural awareness workshops, ethnic
studies courses, etc.
diversity science

Examines the ways in which people create, interpret, and maintain group differences and the
psychological and societal consequences of these distinctions.
diversity training
The many types of professional development programs that help managers and employees in
organizations to avoid bias against persons based on gender, ethnicity, skin color, religion, sexual
orientation, and disability. These programs can be voluntary or mandated by the federal Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission.
diversity within diversity
Each diversity group contains significant variability, for example, Latino/Latina persons differ in
(a) heritage (Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, etc.); (b) generations in the United States; (c)
physical appearance; (d) identification with their heritage; and (e) cultural practices.
Dogmatism Scale
Measures extremist orientations and rigidity of belief in either a politically conservative or
liberal direction.
Don’t ask, don’t tell
The official U.S. policy on gay men and women serving in the military. The policy prohibited
military personnel from discriminating against or harassing closeted gay or bisexual service
members or applicants, but it barred openly gay, lesbian, or bisexual persons from military
service. On July 22, 2011, President Barack Obama, Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta, and
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen certified that repeal of DADT would
not harm military readiness, and on September 20, 2011 the policy officially ended.
dynamic systems theory
States that human behavior is jointly linked to factors occurring within the person (endogenous)
and to those occurring in the person’s environment (exogenous).
electroencephalography (EEG)
Assesses electrical activity in the brain using electrodes pasted temporarily onto the head.
Because typically many electrodes are needed, participants often wear special caps with
electrodes built in. When neurons in the brain are active, they emit small electrical impulses
(microvolts) that EEG detects and analyzes. EEG is especially good at detecting rapid changes in
brain activity.
Emancipation Proclamation

Made by Abraham Lincoln on September 22, 1862, the proclamation stated that “all persons
held as slaves within any State or designated part of a State … shall be then, thenceforward, and
forever free.”
empathy
Understanding the perspective of the other person so that we respond emotionally to their
situation.
enculturation
Refers to the process where parents may want their children to function effectively in their own
culture but also teach or expose them to a new culture to prepare them for functioning in a
different cultural context. See also acculturation.
enemyship
The belief that another person holds personal hatred and malice toward you and desires your
downfall or attempts to sabotage your progress.
entity theorists
People who believe that race is an essential, fixed category of human difference.
epigenetic
Refers to the concept that genes are responsible for personal traits, but that cultural, social, and
environmental contexts shape how these traits evolve and how we behave.
equity
Refers to whether groups are treated in a way that does not unfairly impose economic, social, or
other barriers that would prevent them from reaching their full potential.
ethnic identity
Refers to the ideas people have of themselves as members of an ethnic group.
ethnicity
Refers to a social group that is defined on the basis of cultural criteria.
ethnophaulisms
Words that constitute slurs against ethnic groups, and exclusion from U.S. society, for example
“mick” (Irish), “dago” (Italian).
evolutionary psychology

Focuses on how evolutionary adaptations can influence current behavior, and shows how our
past influences our everyday interactions, often in universal ways.
Executive Order 9066
Issued by President Franklin Roosevelt in 1942, this authorized the forcible relocation and
internment of approximately 110,000 Japanese nationals and Japanese Americans. Of those
interned, 62% were U.S. citizens. The exclusionary order was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court
in 1944. In 1988 Congress passed and President Ronald Reagan signed legislation that
apologized for the internment, stating that government actions were based on “race prejudice,
war hysteria, and a failure of political leadership.” A total of $1.6 billion in reparations were later
disbursed by the U.S. government to surviving internees and their heirs.
Executive Order 9981
Signed by President Harry S. Truman on July 26, 1948, this order mandated “equality of
treatment and opportunity for all persons in the armed services without regard to race, color,
religion, or national origin.”
Executive Order 11246
Signed by President Johnson on September 24, 1965, this order required that all federal
contractors take affirmative action to ensure that job applicants are judged and employees are
treated fairly without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Affirmative
action policy established a standard of equal treatment for groups that had been historically
disadvantaged and discriminated against, as well as sanctions for violations of nondiscrimination practices.
expert influence
Source of power based on people’s beliefs that another person has some know-how and
understanding that is not yet available to them, which gives the other person social power in
the situation.
explicit bias
Preference for or against a social group that a person is aware of and consciously controls. It can
be expressed as an attitude, an evaluation, or a behavior.
extended contact hypothesis
Presents the idea that an in-group member’s mere knowledge of another in-group member’s
close positive relationship with a person in an out-group can reduce intergroup bias. For
example, White students who know another White person who has a Black, Asian, or Latino

friend has more positive attitudes toward that racial or ethnic group than do Whites who do not
know such a person.
extrinsic religiosity
Using one’s religion to connect to a community, gain social status, or increase personal security.
fairness
A cultural and moral concept indicating that access to opportunities and resources are available
to anyone without regard to social group status.
fast-learning system
Memory system that is more conscious, effortful, and intentional. This is the system you use
when you encounter new challenges that you want to master. This system allows you to learn
quickly from limited exposure, drawing from a range of cognitive resources.
four-fifths rule
A guideline to provide employers with a uniform set of principles for hiring without
discrimination based on age, disability, color, sex, religion, national origin, or race. The EEOC
Uniform Guidelines state that a selection rate for any group less than four-fifths, or 80%, of the
rate for the group with the highest rate will generally be regarded as evidence of disparate
impact by the agency charged with protecting employment civil rights.
frustration–aggression hypothesis
Proposes that frustration causes aggression and all aggression can be traced back to some form
of frustration.
F-scale
Derived from research on the authoritarian personality, this scale measures anti-Semitism and
ethnocentrism without mentioning specifically the groups to which antagonisms were
expressed; it is broadly predictive of prejudice.
full participation
An affirmative value that directs institutions to enable people of all identities, backgrounds, or
institutional positions to thrive, engage meaningfully in institutional life, and contribute to the
well-being of others.
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)

Measures blood flow within the brain to indicate brain activity. Researchers use fMRI to learn
what areas of the brain are active when people are exposed to different stimuli, such as a
photograph of a person with light or dark skin, or when they engage in or think about certain
activities.
fundamental attribution error
The attributional bias that involves overestimating the role of another’s stable character as the
cause of his or her behavior.
fundamental preferences
The outcomes we value or prefer.
fusiform face area (FFA)
A distinct brain area located not too far from the amygdala. Whereas the amygdala is part of the
brain’s general early-warning system, the fusiform face area is specialized to process
information about others’ faces.
Gentlemen’s Agreement 1907
The United States struck an agreement with Japan that promised not to restrict Japanese
immigration as long as Japan voluntarily restricted emigration to the United States to uppermiddle-class Japanese.

Grutter v. Bollinger (2003)
University of Michigan Law School rejected Barbara Grutter, a White Michigan resident. The
Center for Individual Rights filed suit on her behalf, alleging that the university had
discriminated against her on the basis of race. She said she was rejected because the Law
School used race as a factor, and that the university had no compelling interest to justify the
consideration of race in the admissions process. The Supreme Court upheld Michigan Law
School.
Haymarket Affair
On May 4, 1886, a rally of laborers in support of an 8-hour work day was held in Haymarket
Square in Chicago. Led by anarchists who were mostly German and eastern European
immigrants, a bomb was thrown at the police and a riot ensued. Known as the Haymarket Affair,
it fueled nativist anti-immigration sentiment.
Health disparities

Racial and ethnic minority-group members typically suffer poorer health and have much higher
mortality rates than majority-group members for similar conditions in the United States and
across 125 other countries.
Hernandez v. Texas (1954)
This landmark Supreme Court case decided that Mexican Americans, as ethnic minorities, had a
right to equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment. There was no legal requirement
that a person was entitled to be tried by a jury of peers, only that no racial, ethnic, or gender
groups could be excluded from serving on juries. It held that Mexican Americans had been
systematically excluded from serving on juries in Texas.
hostile sexism
Openly negative attitudes and endorsement of negative stereotypes of women.
human capital
The collective skills, knowledge, or other intangible assets of individuals that convey value for
the individuals, their institutions, or their communities.
human diversity
Refers to the study of the human species, one of the most widely distributed and varied animal
species.

hypothesis
An expectation, or prediction, derived directly from a theory. It is an inference based on a set of
earlier observations about what will happen under certain conditions.
identity affirmation
A way to modify negative stereotype threat effects by embracing group stereotypes and seeking
out evaluative diagnostic tasks.
identity diversity
Represents differences among people based on sex, gender orientation, religion, race, ethnicity,
age, sexual orientation, immigrant status, and so on that are reflected in their affinity for, and
identification with, those social categories.
identity safety

Systematically identify the identity contingencies that undermine well-being and actively alter
their adverse effects, resulting in feelings of social belonging in settings where negative identity
contingencies exist.
Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (1996)
Beefed up border patrols, and enhanced enforcement and penalties, inspection, apprehension,
and detention. It further forbid employment and sanctioned U.S. businesses for violations. In
spite of the law, however, illegal immigration persisted.
illusory correlation
The tendency to associate qualities that we see as rare with groups that are small in number;
conversely, we link the qualities we view as common with groups that are large.
imagined contact
The act of mentally simulating an interaction with a member of another group. Simulating a
positive intergroup interaction can help reduce prejudice toward members of the group.
immigration
The act of settling in a new country with the desire to remain there permanently.
Immigration Act of 1917
Restricted immigration from Asia by creating an Asiatic Barred Zone.
Immigration Act of 1924
The Act established a formula for immigration that (a) capped total immigration to the United
States at 150,000 per year; (b) assigned quotas to specific nations; (c) restricted immigrant visas
from quota nations; (d) made it easier to immigrate from non-quota nations by requiring simple
proof of residence in the country of origin for at least 2 years prior to emigration to the United
States; and (e) limited immigration from Asiatic nations to professionals, clergy, and students.
Immigration and Nationality Act 1965
Abolished the national-origin quotas that had been in place since the 1924 Immigration Act. An
annual limitation of 300,000 visas was established for immigrants, including 170,000 from
eastern hemisphere countries, with a limit of 20,000 per country. By equalizing immigration
policies, the Act resulted in new immigration from non-European nations, which changed the
ethnic make-up of the United States.
Implicit Association Test (IAT)

In the IAT, people have to make decisions about different groups (such as Anglos and Latinos or
Whites and Blacks) in conjunction with positive and negative words. Faster response times
reflect stronger implicit associations of different groups with positive or negative words. This
test is the most commonly used technique for assessing implicit biases.
implicit bias
Preference for or against a social group that a person may be unaware of and thus cannot
consciously control. They may be expressed in one’s attitudes, evaluations, or behaviors.
increasing opportunities for contact
One of five bias-reducing techniques that involves seeking opportunities to encounter and
engage in positive interactions with counter-stereotypic group members.
independent variable
The element that changes or varies in the way that a researcher has decided to manipulate it.
indirect contact
Involves learning about others’ intergroup contact, observing others engaging in intergroup
interaction, or imagining oneself interacting with a member of another group.

individual bias
Expressed as a negative attitude about an entire group, resulting in behavior that directly
discriminates against a person belonging to that group. Personal expressions and actions of
superiority and/or inferiority often represent centuries-old attitudes that have been
perpetuated through parenting practices and both institutional and cultural bias.
individualism
A theory whose proponents focus more on rights above duties, a concern for oneself and
immediate family, and emphasizes personal autonomy and self-fulfillment, and basing one’s
identity on personal accomplishments.
individual-mediated bias
Occurs when a person who is prejudiced against particular groups has key decision-making
authority in an institution.
individuation

One of five bias-reducing techniques that involves obtaining specific information about group
members to prevent drawing stereotypic inferences about them.
inferential statistics
Used to test the researcher’s hypothesis, such as the t test, χ2 (chi-square), and F statistics.
institution
An established entity in which the business, education, healthcare, or social goals of a society
are sustained. Banks, schools, corporations, the health industry, higher education, and the like
are institutions.
institutional bias
Institutional practices that favor some groups over others. The causes of institutional bias are
not always obvious, and may occur without intention and thus is expressed as implicit bias.
institutional racism
Institutional practices that reflect and produce racial inequalities in American society, whether
intentional or unintentional, overt or covert.

institutional sexism
Institutional practices that reflect and produce gender inequalities in American society, whether
intentional or unintentional, overt or covert, often accompanied by positive attitudes toward
women. See benevolent sexism.
instrumental preferences
The means by which we pursue preferred outcomes.
integrative complexity
The degree of integration and differentiation of multiple perspectives and dimensions in a
person’s thinking pattern.
intergroup anxiety
Discomfort associated with anticipating or actually interacting with a member of another group.
Intergroup Dialogues Course
This course, recognizing that diversity is more than skin deep, is based on five principles for
bringing diversity and democracy into alignment: (a) presence of diverse others, (b)

discontinuity from pre-college experiences, (c) equality among peers, (d) discussion under rules
of civil discourse and normalization, and (e) negotiation of conflict. Participants came from
diverse backgrounds, and the curriculum consisted of readings, lectures and papers, and
intergroup dialogues.
intergroup (versus interpersonal) interaction
When you interact with other members of your own group, it is interpersonal. But when you
interact with members of another group, these interpersonal interactions become intergroup
encounters.
internalized homophobia
When negative stereotypes about gays and lesbians become the basis for self-hatred resulting in
less self-disclosure to heterosexual friends and acquaintances, less feeling of connection to the
gay and lesbian community, and more depressive symptoms and demoralization.

intersectionality
A psychological concept referring to the complex interactions that exist for each person, among
the various social roles they occupy in a society. All persons jointly occupy different social roles
such as woman, teacher, parent, lesbian, White, and so on.
intrinsic religiosity
A deep commitment to the principles of religion for the meaning it provides in one’s life.
jigsaw classroom
The jigsaw classroom gets its name from a jigsaw puzzle, a puzzle for which all the pieces are
needed to complete a picture. The strategy is to replace competition in classrooms with
cooperation. Instead of students separating themselves from others to work independently or
seeking to distinguish themselves from others with superior performance, the jigsaw classroom
mandates interdependence and cooperation. Students are placed into learning groups, with
each person having responsibility for a proportion of the information needed to complete a
task.
Jim Crow Laws
State and local laws in the United States enacted between 1876 and 1965 that mandated legal
racial segregation in all public facilities in former Confederate southern States.

just-world hypothesis
People need to see the world as a just place in which they get what they deserve and deserve
what they get. Believing that the world is just makes it seem more predictable and controllable.
lens model
Gordon Allport’s framework outlining the causes of prejudice, ranging from those very broad
and distant to those more narrow and immediate. Moving from the broadest to the most
specific, the sources of prejudice are categorized as historical, sociocultural, situational,
personality based, phenomenological, and based on the qualities of the target of prejudice.
meritocracy
A core belief about how benefits should be earned and bestowed. In theory, merit is objectively
determined on an individual basis, such that the better one’s performance, the better should be
one’s rewards.
meta-perceptions
Your beliefs about what other people think about you.
minimal groups
Reducing what it means to be in a group as much as possible. This technique was used to test
how a psychological sense of social identity affects the way people think and act even when
there is no consequential relationship between different groups or among members of the
same group.
monochronic time (M-time)
Characterized by doing one thing at a time in a sequential pattern: following schedules,
completing one task before starting another, persisting in goal-directed activities, and
disregarding distractions.
Montgomery bus boycott
Plans to boycott the Montgomery bus service were put into operation on December 5, 1955,
demanding that Black riders be treated with courtesy, Black drivers be hired, and seating in the
middle of the bus be handled on a first-come basis. The Montgomery bus boycott expanded to
sit-ins, marches, and other forms of passive non-violent resistance.
moral license
Frees us from controlling our biases because we have engaged in a prior activity that convinces
us that we are not prejudiced and thus no longer have to work at being unbiased.

multiculturalism
Social ideology based on the belief that harmony and social justice among different groups can
best be achieved if we appreciate our diversity and recognize and accept both positive and
negative qualities of different cultural groups.
multicultural perspective
Reflects the belief that preserving different cultures or cultural identities within institutions and
societies is desirable and beneficial.
Multidimensional Inventory of Black Identity (MIBI)
A scale developed to assess dimensions of Black identity.
Multidimensional Model of Racial Identity (MMRI)
A theory that most people have a hierarchy of social identities. The place of racial identity in this
hierarchy depends on its centrality and salience, the regard you and others have for your group,
and the racial ideologies with which you judge yourself and others in your group.
Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure (MEIM)
The most widely used measure of generalized ethnic identity.
multiracial identity
A recognized identity classification resulting from the immigration explosion and the desire to
claim one’s heritage in full measure, as well as greater openness to intimate unions across racial
and ethnic lines.
mutual intergroup differentiation
Involves maintaining distinct group identities, which limit threats to valued social identity, but
within the context of cooperative interdependence between groups.
narrowly tailored
In the Supreme Court’s majority view, remedies to racial segregation cannot be based on race
unless they are in response to individual instances of unlawful discrimination.
nativism
A feeling that the large-scale influx of “foreigners” was a threat to the emerging life and culture
of the United States.
need for cognitive closure (NFCC)

A strong preference and need for having firm answers to questions and understanding of
situations compared to confusion and uncertainty.
needs-based model of reconciliation
Needs that become important to us when our social identities are activated. In intergroup
interactions, members of majority groups or groups that have harmed other groups historically
seek to be accepted; members of minority or victimized groups seek to be empowered.
neuroses
Psychological problems that impair a person’s activities but do not prevent him or her from
functioning in society.
Nigresence
The process of becoming Black. Nigresence evolves from an encounter in which a deracialized
identity becomes racialized through some sort of negative encounter based on one’s race. The
deracialized identity is shaken up, challenged, and gives way to a racialized identity—the old
identity is demolished and a new frame of reference is adopted.
non-verbal behavior
Our physical actions other than what we say, such as eye contact and gestures.
norms
Informal rules, standards, and expectations within a group powerfully determine how we
interact with others, including members of other groups.
objectification
Occurs when a person is treated as a mere body that exists for the sexual use and pleasure of
others. Feeling objectified adversely affects people’s intellectual and social behaviors.
objective SES
The actual household or individual income reported for an individual or family.
“one drop” rule
Meant that a person with any African blood was socially identified as Black.
optimal distinctiveness theory
Argues that people have simultaneous and competing drives for both distinctiveness and
inclusiveness. When inclusiveness exceeds an individual’s optimal level—too much “we-ness”—

they seek to increase their distinctiveness—more “me-ness.” This balancing act implies that
when contexts are too homogeneous, too inclusive, diversity should become a more important
goal.
out-group homogeneity
The tendency of people to see members of the out-group as very similar to each other, in
contrast to perceiving in-group members as more heterogeneous.
own-race bias
The phenomenon that people are better able to distinguish and remember faces of people from
their own race than from other races.
perceived discrimination
Involves a person’s perception that he or she has been unfairly treated in a given situation.
When people perceive they have been discriminated against, whether based on their
race/ethnicity or lower socioeconomic status, their physical and psychological health may suffer.
perceptual narrowing
The hypothesis that human perceptual systems are shaped by experience to be optimally
sensitive to stimuli most commonly encountered in their cultural environment.
personal identity
Represents what we believe makes us unique compared to all other people. Your experiences,
characteristics, talents, and values are distinctive; there is no one else just like you.
personality
Refers to the characteristic way that a particular individual interacts with the social and physical
world.
personalization
Exchanging information about each other in a way that conveys each person’s unique qualities.
When intergroup interactions are personalized, people typically recognize that their stereotypes
of the other group are incorrect, which undermines their bias against the group as whole.
perspective taking
One of five bias-reducing techniques that involves adopting the perspective of a person who is a
member of a stereotyped group.
phenotypicality

Refers to features of the face that are perceived to be most typical for a member of that racial
or ethnic group.
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)
On June 7, 1892, Homer Plessy boarded a car of the East Louisiana Railroad that was designated
for use by White patrons only. Although Mr Plessy was only one-eighth Black, under Louisiana
state law he was classified as an African American and required to sit in the “colored” car. When
he refused, he was arrested and jailed. Plessy argued that his constitutional rights under the
Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments had been violated. He lost. When Plessy appealed to
the Supreme Court, his appeal was rejected, establishing the “separate but equal” doctrine for
racial inequality.
pluralistic ignorance
A phenomenon that occurs in intergroup racial situations where people mistakenly believe that
their interest in interacting with a member of another racial group is not reciprocated, leading
both parties to avoid initiating intergroup contact.
polychronic time (P-time)
Characterized by doing many things at once, casual disregard for punctuality, and focus on social
transactions and affective states.
post-racial
Era in America when it was believed that race was no longer a barrier to progress, opportunity
or accomplishment and that race no longer mattered and racism was a thing of the past. A
substantial body of research demonstrates this to be an inaccurate understanding of the
influence of race.
power distance
Reflects the relative degree of power between a dominant and subordinate person in a social
system (an office, a classroom, a sports team, an airplane cockpit). A boss and an employee are
not equals—the boss naturally has more power.
power distance index (PDI)
Indicated by the degree to which a subordinate (a) is afraid to disagree with a superior, (b)
perceives that the superior makes decisions in an autocratic or paternalistic way, and (c) prefers
that the superior makes decisions in an authoritative or paternalistic way.
power dynamics

A term that represents how power is acquired and maintained and the complex relationships
among diversity status, power, and privilege.
predicament
An unpleasant, troublesome, or trying situation from which it is difficult to extricate oneself.

preference diversity
Reflects differences in taste and values, including fundamental preferences (the outcomes we
value or prefer) and instrumental preferences (the means by which we pursue preferred
outcomes).
prejudice
Negatively biased attitudes toward, and general unfavorable evaluations of, a group that are
then ascribed to individual members of the group. Stereotypes and prejudice often lead to
preferential treatment for some groups and discrimination against others.
prevention focus
Involves avoiding situations in which interacting with others is motivated by feelings of duty,
obligation, or responsibility.
privilege
The rights and opportunities that are associated with status in a social hierarchy. The more
rights and opportunities a person possesses, the more privileged they are. Privilege is often an
indicator of social and economic inequality among social groups.
procedural justice
Emphasizes the importance of seeing that decisions about rewards are made fairly whether the
outcome is favorable or not.
promotion focus
Involves seeking or approaching situations in which one is motivated to interact with others
because of desires to support them or to achieve some desired goals.
protective disidentification
The tendency to define or redefine the self-concept so that performance outcomes are not a
basis of self-evaluation or personal identity in a given domain. For instance, rejecting academic
performance as a basis for self-evaluation.

Protestant work ethic
Values hard work as the basis of individual accomplishment.

psychodynamic theory
A theory developed by Sigmund Freud that explains prejudice, stereotyping, and discrimination
as intra-individual processes, as ways to satisfy individual needs grounded in basic life (Eros) and
death (Thanatos) instincts.
psychology of diversity
Examines the basic psychological processes that are triggered when we encounter people who
are different from us in significant and salient ways, or experience being treated differently by
others because of our social status. It further explores the dynamics of mental representation
and social interaction across institutions and differential bases of power, privilege, and status.
Finally, it identifies the effects of diverse contexts on the thoughts, actions, and feelings of
people in them.
psychopathology
A condition that reflects abnormal psychological functioning.
race
A form of social grouping in which observable physical characteristics that distinguish a group of
people are linked to a range of other non-visible, but also assumed to be genetically
determined, characteristics such as intelligence. The concept of race, and associated beliefs
about a hierarchy of races, supported the exploitation of some groups, determined immigration
quotas, and justified the subordination of slaves.
racial identity
The degree to which a person identifies with, values, and represents his or her racial group in
his or her personal view of self.
racial integration
The idea that people of all races should comingle across all aspects of society on an equal basis.
Racial integration is a core principle of fairness and basic civil and human rights.
racialized

When racial beliefs are actively used to categorize and judge people.
racial paralysis
Describes a situation where a person is unable to act when confronted with a situation in which
either of two different responses—approach or avoidance—may be interpreted as racial bias.
racial socialization
Refers to verbal and behavioral practices of families that inform a child about how race affects
personal and group identity, intergroup and interpersonal relations, and position in the social
hierarchy.
racism
The coordinated interaction of individual-level biases such as stereotypes, prejudice, and
discrimination with societal- and cultural-level biases. This process creates disadvantaged and
advantaged groups based on presumably distinct biological traits.
random assignment
The placement of participants into conditions of an experiment in a way that, on average, would
make the groups comparable at the beginning of the study. Thus, any observed difference in
performance by the groups cannot be explained by any prior differences among people who
were in the two groups.
realistic group conflict theory
Seeing other groups as competitors for material resources (e.g., money) arouses bias, leads
people to discriminate, and often produces open conflict.
realistic threat
The concern that another group will harm our health, take our group’s resources (e.g., jobs) or
territory.
recategorization
Designed to alter group boundaries but by redefining rather than by eliminating group
categorization. Recategorization typically involves changing the way people see others from
members of different groups to members of the same inclusive group.
referent influence

Source of power based on a person’s interest in identifying with another person. The person’s
admiration of the other person and desire to be like the other person gives the other person
social power.
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Allan Bakke, a White man, applied to the University of California at Davis Medical School in both
1973 and 1974 and was denied admission. In both years, Black and Latino/Latina applicants
whose grade-point averages and standardized test scores were lower than Bakke’s were
admitted under a special admissions program that set aside 16 of the 100 available admissions
slots for minority applicants. Bakke filed a racial discrimination lawsuit and it was upheld by the
California Supreme Court. The university appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
rejection sensitivity
Refers to the extent to which a person is anxious about being rejected based on his or her group
membership. Because people high in rejection sensitivity generally expect to be rejected
because of their group membership, they tend to perceive rejection in the ambiguous behaviors
of others.
relational demography
The idea that both demographic differences and similarities between coworkers and supervisors
affect task performance and behavior in organizational settings, but in somewhat different ways.
relative deprivation
Reflects the discontent people feel when they compare their positions to others and realize that
they have less of what they believe they are entitled to than those around them.
relative values
Values that are right for only yourself.
research design
A plan for how data will be collected. Research designs use different standards of control that
are somewhat similar to quality control standards for any industry.
reverse discrimination
The belief that affirmative action programs are biased against majority groups, because they
create an unfair advantage for underrepresented groups. Those with this view argue that the
policy unfairly excludes qualified applicants, typically Whites, while accepting less qualified
applicants, typically Blacks and Hispanics.

right-wing authoritarianism
A contemporary measure that refines the theory behind authoritarianism and improves the
psychometric properties of the scale. Right-wing authoritarianism involves an inclination to
submit to people of greater authority or status, hostility toward deviants and members of other
groups, and a strong commitment to the traditional norms and values of one’s group.
rugged individualism
A pioneering spirit of personal adventure, self-improvement, and accomplishment that is
considered the driving force behind the settling and expansion of the United States.
scapegoating
The phenomenon in which people who are frustrated by one source but are unable to retaliate
directly (e.g., because the person or source is unavailable or too powerful) displace aggression
in a more socially acceptable way onto a more convenient and socially available person or
group.
schadenfreude
The pleasure that we experience when an out-group suffers.
scientific method
A particular problem-solving approach that is common to all sciences that follows a particular
logic and a series of prescribed stages beginning with a formal or informal observation about
specific events or a pattern of outcomes that is sufficiently important. In psychology, it is the
method by which we determine the causes of behavior.
secondary transfer effects
Involve the generalization of the benefits of contact to other types of out-groups. The positive
feelings generated by contact with members of one out-group extend to other out-groups that
are seen as similar, even though members of these groups were not involved in the intergroup
encounter.
self-categorization theory
A theory that distinguishes personal identity from social identity. Different situations make a
particular social identity salient, and we respond in ways that represent what a typical group
member should think, feel, and do.
self-fulfilling prophecy

This process, by which expectations become reality, happens when the effects of the need for
consistency reach much farther than affecting just our own behavior, also shaping others’
reactions, leading them to behave in ways consistent with what we expected in the first place.
shooter bias
Numerous studies in psychology present participants with simulated situations in which they
have to make a split-second decision about whether to shoot a man who may or may not have a
weapon in his hand. Both Black and White college students as well as police officers are more
likely to mistakenly shoot an unarmed Black man than an unarmed White man, and they do so
faster. They are also less likely to shoot an armed White man than an armed Black man.
slow-learning system
Memory system that records information slowly and is sensitive to repeated patterns, events,
and activities. It produces long-term stable knowledge that we can access automatically and
unconsciously through sensory cues.
social bias
Personal attitudes, laws, institutional policies, and informal practices that perpetuate race,
ethnic, and gender biases. They can sometimes happen without specific people intentionally
driving these processes.
social categorization
Occurs when individuals view and arrange themselves and others into social categories based
on many different labels like, most commonly, race, religion, socioeconomic status, political
affiliation and attitudes, sexual orientation, gender, and the like.
social class
An indicator of social standing comprising two features: (a) material resources or assets and (b)
social status in the social hierarchy. Social status is how a person is perceived compared to the
social prestige and resources of others.
social cognition
The way we think about others and come to understand our social world.
social construction
When differences between groups do exist, but they are mainly rooted in social and cultural
adaptations to different environments and circumstances, for example, the concept of race.
social dominance

A group’s status in the social hierarchy is determined by the group’s access to and exercise of
power.
social dominance orientation (SDO)
Individual differences in the degree to which people endorse and value hierarchical relations
between groups and the associated unequal privileges and resources.
social dominance theory
A theory of intergroup relations that focuses on the maintenance and stability of group-based
social hierarchies through institutional discrimination, individual discrimination, and widely
shared cultural ideologies (i.e., legitimizing myths) that provide the moral and intellectual
justification for these intergroup behaviors.
social group power
Acquired, expressed, and maintained by the proportion of high-status social roles occupied by
members of that group. These power differences constantly affect the interactions among social
groups and between and among people.
social identity
An identity that you share with others—special others, those in a group that you belong to and
care about. These are largely independent ways of thinking.
social identity theory
A highly influential theory that introduced the distinction between collective (social) and
personal identity. It originally proposed that people derive self-esteem from their membership
in socially valued groups and thus try to distinguish their group from other groups in favorable
ways. This theory explains when and why individuals identify with and behave as members of
specific social groups.
social indicators
Measures of social outcomes for members of a society such as employment rates and
healthcare statistics. Social indicator measures are used to determine whether, and the extent
to which, bias has occurred.
social influence
A concept that assumes that people influence the social behavior of other persons through a
variety of person-to-person and group interactions.
socialization

What parents do with their children to prepare them to function effectively as adults in our
society. Socializing children is not only done by parents but also by other family members (like
grandparents, uncles/aunts and older siblings) as well as by other adults (like coaches, teachers,
religious leaders) and often peers as well.
social power
The ability to control assets and the access that others have to those assets.
social role
Represents a set of expectations for the position an individual occupies in a group or society. It
substantially determines how a person will behave and interact with others. A social role also
conveys access to social status, social dominance, and to privilege.
social role hierarchies
Stratification systems that reflect status and privileges given to persons who occupy particular
social roles in a society. These hierarchies convey more privileges and status to some based on
their actual or perceived contributions to the well-being of society or according to the status
given to particular social roles.
social role theory
Proposes that people infer the qualities of groups based on the different roles that members of
a group occupy—women are nurturing because they are mothers.
social status
The prestige associated with your position in society. It is a combination of education, job
status, and income.
socioeconomic status (SES)
Determined by a subject’s financial resources, access to educational opportunities, and
participation in social institutions.
soto
When affective bonds with others are weak.
standard-of-practice bias
When regular, sanctioned institutional practices produce outcomes and opportunities that favor
some groups more than others. These practices represent the standard operations that define

institutional policies and programs that govern hiring, production, promotion, and employee
relations.
status quo
The current state of affairs in a society, institution, or organization and existing customs,
practices, and social role hierarchies (see definition above). The existing rules, customs, and
cultural practices recognized by persons in a society or organization. Often persons resist
changing the status quo even if the existing rules, customs, or cultural practices do not give
them an advantage.
stereotype boost
When the stereotype about one’s group is positive, performance gets better when one’s group
affiliation is made salient.
stereotype content model
Describes how the content of group stereotypes is determined by how a group is perceived on
two dimensions, warmth and competence.
stereotype disconfirmation
Experiences with a member of a group who displays qualities that are inconsistent with beliefs
about what that group is like. A first-hand experience with a person who disconfirms a group
stereotype can weaken a person’s stereotypes of the group.
stereotype replacement
One of five bias-reducing techniques that involves replacing stereotypical responses with nonstereotypical responses.
stereotypes
Beliefs about qualities associated with particular groups and their members. Stereotypes are
also based on the social roles that a person usually occupies—leader, officer, cleaner. Group
stereotypes distinguish a group from others. They represent social perceptions about consistent
qualities presumed to be shared by all members of a group.
stereotype threat
Proposes that situations containing cues making a negative stereotype about your social group
salient and your awareness of the possibility that your performance will confirm it creates
anxiety and undermines your performance.
stigma

A “stain” or a symbol indicating that a person is worthy of rejection or special, usually negative,
treatment.

stress
When the resources needed to manage a particular situation are perceived to be more than you
possess, you feel anxiety and negative arousal.
structural discrimination
Related to institutional bias but focuses more on the conditions that create inequities.
Sociologists refer to structural or unintentional bias as practices that result in outcomes that are
substantially worse for some groups than for others. This structural bias is passed on from
generation to generation, in informal policies and practices, and the negative outcomes
accumulate.
structural diversity
One of Milem’s three interrelated ways to view diversity: numerical and proportional
representation.
subjective culture
Refers to the influence of cultural standards and practices on what is considered right and
wrong, good and bad, acceptable and unacceptable; and which human categories are
important, how they are perceived and valued, and the course of interactions within culturally
diverse contexts.
subjective SES
A concept related to objective SES that refers to the perception that an individual has of their
social status in a society. This perception may be related to objective SES.
subtle prejudice
A modern form of bias that may be unrecognized or unacknowledged that leads people to
discriminate in indirect and rationalizable ways.
superordinate goals
Outcomes that are mutually desired by different groups that can be accomplished only if the
groups work together.
suppression

Directed at one’s inner thoughts and which involves conscious attempts to inhibit the activation
of negative attitudes, feelings, or beliefs when we sense that we are beginning to experience
them.
symbolic racism
The expression of prejudice in the form of opposition to policies that support minority groups is
closely tied to political behavior (e.g., opposition to bilingual education).
symbolic threat
Involves perceptions that another group challenges our core values and way of life.
system justification theory (SJT)
Suggests there is a strong psychological motivation that causes people to defend and maintain
power hierarchies and social order. SJT describes how those in charge perpetuate myths about
the legitimacy of the social order and the importance of maintaining it as well as how those
who are disadvantaged by those myths continue to cling to them.
system-justifying ideologies
Cultural belief that rationalizes inequalities between groups that contributes to the status quo
and makes the advantaged status of some groups over others appear fair and reduces the
likelihood that these advantages will be questioned as illegitimate.
tempoagnostic
Where time holds personal and cultural meaning but has no inherent value—a person cannot
save time, invest time, or even waste time.
temponomic
Where time is an unseen arbiter of values, accomplishments, order, and sometimes character.
Time directly affects behavior—efficiency, punctuality, discipline, productivity, and achievement
are often measured against a template of time.
terror management theory
Anything that makes us aware of our mortality, increases existential threat, and leads us to
reaffirm things we believe in so we can continue to “live on” after our material deaths.
The Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)
Declared that “Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United
States or by any State on account of sex.” The law was passed by Congress in 1972 and over a

roughly 10-year period was ratified by 35 of the necessary 38 states required to become law.
Finally in 1982, the effort to obtain ratification from three more states was abandoned.

The Five Civilized Tribes
Cherokee, Muscogee (Creek), Seminole, Chickasaw, and Choctaw nations were all forced to
relocate from the southeastern United States to Indian Territory, in what is now eastern
Oklahoma, because of the Indian Removal Act.
theory
An abstract explanation about a natural social phenomenon. It must be coherent and internally
consistent. It must also be testable.
theory of social influence
This theory identifies three types of power that people use to exercise control (see social
influence) over others: (a) legitimate authority that comes from the leader’s position; (b)
coercive power, based on threats or actual punishment; and (c) reward power, which is the
positive opposite of coercive power. The theory also includes (d) expert influence and (e)
referent influence. The ability to attain and exercise power depends on these basic dimensions
of power.
The Trail of Tears
The forced march west of the Five Civilized Tribes which led to great suffering from exposure,
disease, and starvation and large-scale deaths en route to their destinations.
threat response
Seeking to escape a situation or to protect ourselves against harm.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972
Stipulated that no person shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied
the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity
receiving Federal financial assistance. Title IX is most notably invoked to support participation of
women in athletics. But it also prohibited any educational institution receiving Federal financial
assistance from denying admission to any course of study on the ground of blindness or
severely impaired vision.
TRIOS

Acronym for Time, Rhythm, Improvisation, Orality, and Spirituality. A theory which represents
the cultural capital that Africans brought with them to the New World. TRIOS is associated with
characteristics that are useful for coping and adapting to threatening and uncertain contexts.
TRIOS characteristics include flexible and creative responses to unexpected threats and
challenges, using verbal and non-verbal communication to share information and knowledge,
establishing group boundaries and creating group cohesion, adopting ways to be in synch with
situations and contexts one is in, acute focus on the demands and opportunities of the
immediate context, and drawing upon a spiritual belief in a power beyond oneself to make
sense of one’s predicament and alternative positive possibilities.
uchi
When affective bonds with others are strong.
ultimate attribution error
The tendency to attribute negative behaviors of out-groups to dispositional qualities (bad
behavior is because he is a bad person) and positive behaviors to external forces (the teacher
felt sorry for him so gave him a good grade).
universal context of racism (UCR)
This approach proposes that racism is a chronically accessible explanation for negative
outcomes and motivates targets to be vigilant and wary. Belonging to a racial group that is
socially salient and historically stigmatized renders the possibility of race-based bias highly
accessible. The accessibility of race bias has the potential to influence interpretations of an
individual’s experiences and expectations, the goals they set and the likelihood they attain
them.
values
Desirable trans-situational goals, varying in importance, that serve as guiding principles in
people’s lives.
voice
The opportunity to participate in and have influence on decisions that affect you.
Voting Rights Act of 1965
Outlawed literacy tests and provided for the appointment of Federal examiners with the power
to register qualified citizens to vote. It also applied a nationwide prohibition of the denial or
abridgment of the right to vote because of race or color.

White identity
How Whites view themselves, including the degree of invisibility of whiteness, the acceptance
of White privilege, and belief in a colorblind ideology.
white-skin privilege
Special opportunities or rights given to a person merely because they have “white” or “light”
skin. These privileges are often unearned and unrecognized by persons who gain opportunities
based on them. These privileges advantage some groups more than others simply based on
phenotypic differences.
worldview
A person’s concept of what the world is and should be like, and the role one has or should have
in it.

